THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT FOR THE PODCAST

How are symmetric asymmetric encryption used

PARTICIPANTS

Prof Iqbal Gondal, FIEAust, GAICD, OELP (Oxford)|Associate Dean|CSS

Dr Vaughan Shanks, Chief Executive Officer Cydarm Technologies

[BEGINNING OF RECORDED MATERIAL]

[RMIT University logo animation]

Iqbal:Vaughan, thanks so much for joining us. Can you tell me about your background in 
cybersecurity? Is that something you have always been interested in?

Vaughan: During my computer science studies, I got quite interested in cryptography. While I was still at 
uni, had a part time job working as a system administrator at a university. And we actually had 
a security incident when someone trying to hack into one of our systems. And my colleague 
and I took some countermeasures to prevent it happening again.

Flash forward a few years. I did a PhD in computer science and got a job working at the 
Department of Defence up in Canberra. So I spent nearly a decade there, including some time 
across in the United States working with our allies over there. And then went on to work at a 
private sector company in the Silicon Valley in their Australian office but headquartered in the 
Silicon Valley where I learned all about how to develop products and how to run a product 
company. And that's how I landed where I am now. So yeah, we've been in business for this is 
our fifth year now. And we make software and we deploy that to customers and they pay us 
for the software. And it's very stressful, but it's also a lot of fun.

Iqbal: Can you talk about the skills that are needed to do what you do and also the skills that needed 
to be a good analyst?

Vaughan: So to be a good cryptanalyst, first of all, you want to be really good at mathematics. So being 
very good at working with large numbers and thinking in the abstract. Beyond, that I think 
having an element of creativity and also you need a lot of persistence. A lot of cryptanalytic 
problems can take years to solve even in some cases. And also helps, I think, to have some 
cultural awareness. So being able to understand the reasons people are sending or the 
reasons people are using encryption and what they're using it for.

You really need people thinking critically, being curious, applying the analytic mindset, and 
thinking like the attacker saying, what would I do if someone had discovered my command 
and control infrastructure? What would I do? How will I prevent people from finding out what 
I'm doing to them? And then if you can think like the attacker, you can then use that to 
construct a better Defence.


Iqbal: Thank you. I want to talk to you now specifically about encryption. Can you tell us the 
difference between the symmetric and asymmetric encryption schemes?

Vaughan: Yes. The difference between symmetric and asymmetric encryption is in symmetric 
encryption, both parties have a shared key. Symmetric encryption is very, very old. People 
have been doing it for centuries. You distribute a key and then you send each other messages 
and use the same key to encrypt the message as you do to decrypt it at the other side.

So the way asymmetric encryption works is that you have a pair, a private and a public key. 
The public key is distributed widely. Doesn't matter who has it. Your private key, you keep to 
yourself. When you want to send a message to someone else, you have to obtain their public 
key and use that to encrypt the data to send to them, which only they can decrypt using the 
private key that corresponds to that public key. So it's a one way encryption process using a 
public key and it's reversed at the other side by the receiver's private key.

Now, where it gets interesting is that usually we combine both asymmetric and symmetric 
encryption. So in practise, doing asymmetric operations is computationally expensive and 
simply not feasible. So what we do is we use the other party's public key to encrypt a randomly 
generated session key for this communication, which is in fact then a symmetric key. And we 
transfer the symmetric key to the other party, encrypt it using their public key so that only 
they can decrypt it using their private key. And then the rest of the communication uses that 
shared symmetric key.

Iqbal:How does your organisation choose between symmetric encryption or asymmetric 
encryption?

Vaughan: Knowing a bit about cryptography as I do, the very first thing to know is that you should not 
roll your own encryption and you should rely on the advice of well established authorities to 
choose what encryption choose what purpose. So I'd say in Australia, the best advice available 
is the government information security manual. Another source of advice is in the US the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. So they provide recommendations on things 
like key length, the type of cryptography, the mode in which it's deployed, different settings, 
that sort of thing, even down to what random number generation system you should use for 
that. And there's a famous saying which is a random number generation algorithm should not 
be chosen at random. You really need to get this stuff right. And history is littered with people 
who tried to make up their own encryption and failed.

Iqbal: How efficient is Advanced Encryption Standard, which is AES, as compared to previous 
encryption schemes?

Vaughan: So the advanced encryption standard was developed in response to the increasing speed of 
computers. And advanced encryption standard uses a 256-bit key, which is in fact 32 bytes of 
data. And it replaced the Data Encryption Standard or DES, which was a 56-bit key, meaning 
only seven bytes of data. So the key length is a lot longer. And what that means is that the 
available number of possible keys is much greater. So if you're trying to reverse symmetric 
encryption, one way to do it or a common approach is to do what's called a brute force attack 
where you try and guess every possible key.

And you would need a very big compute cluster of fast computers to do this. But with 56-bit 
encryption, DES on a modern computer, that's actually fairly trivial to implement. AES on the 
other hand at 256 bits, and there was an earlier 128-bit version, which I would not recommend 


using, is much harder to crack. Many, many orders of magnitude larger, billions and billions of 
possible keys. So it's a lot safer.

Iqbal: How is encryption key management handled by large organisations that have to manage 
large number of public keys?

Vaughan: So typically encryption keys in a large organisation will be managed in some kind of key store. 
And for a large enough organisation, you would actually run your own certifying authority. So 
you'll see this a lot in government agencies or very large telecommunications companies, 
banks, that sort of thing. What this means is they can make their own key-- or anyone can 
make your own key pair.

But the trick is, how do you verify the identity of a counterparty? And to do that, you need to 
have a certifying authority which is able to sign the public keys before you distribute them so 
that the receivers know that they are, in fact, encrypting data for the right counterparty. So for 
example, if you have a public key that's given to you by an attacker and you use that to 
encrypt data for your supposed recipient, then you could be encrypting data that then can be 
decrypted by the attacker. So you need to verify these public keys are, in fact, the public keys 
of the intended recipient of the information.

In a large enough organisation, you would need a certifying authority so you can generate 
these new key pairs or certificates at will. And very often for storing sensitive passphrase and 
keys, you run something like a secret server, which is a type of service specifically designed to 
store secrets. And you can have policies that enable certain people with the right level of 
privilege to get access to those secrets to do a particular job. And you would rotate those 
secrets frequently.

Iqbal:So Vaughan, the future seems to be quantum computing. What vulnerabilities does quantum 
computing create and what can we do about it?

Vaughan: So quantum computing is being developed in a number of different countries. It's become 
almost like an arms race to see who can develop the first functioning quantum computer. And 
quantum computing, what it allows you to do is to represent many states at the same time. 
And so to someone who's a skilled cryptanalyst, this immediately represents an opportunity to 
crack keys a lot faster because you can cycle through billions of combinations of keys 
simultaneously whereas previously you would have to do that across a supercomputer cluster 
and test each key individually.

So the danger is that any traffic that you send that's been encrypted or data that's been stored 
using standard encryption technology is at risk of being decrypted by someone who has a 
quantum computer in the future. And that future is actually not very far away. It could be as 
little as five years away.

So to mitigate against that, we need to have quantum resistant encryption algorithms. There's 
a bunch of standards out there now that have been approved after mathematical scrutiny. 
And I think every organisation should be having a look at that and deciding how they're going 
to implement quantum resistant encryption so that the traffic they're sending today, which 
could be being stored and recorded by an adversary, won't be cracked a few years from now.

Iqbal:Vaughan, thanks for the insights into the future.


[RMIT University logo animation]

[END OF RECORDED MATERIAL]


