160 
5.1 Network Access Control 
Elements of a Network Access Control System 
Network Access Enforcement Methods 
5.2 Extensible Authentication Protocol 
Authentication Methods 
EAP Exchanges 
5.3 IEEE 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control 
5.4 Cloud Computing 
Cloud Computing Elements 
Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
5.5 Cloud Security Risks and Countermeasures 
5.6 Data Protection in the Cloud 
5.7 Cloud Security as a Service 
5.8 Addressing Cloud Computing Security Concerns 
5.9 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 
Chapter 
Network Access Control 
and Cloud Security 

5.1 / Network Acc ess Control 161 
This chapter begins our discussion of network security, focusing on two key topics: 
network 
access control and cloud security. We begin with an overview of network 
access 
control systems, summarizing the principal elements and techniques involved 
in such a system. Next, we discuss the Extensible Authentication Protocol and IEEE 
802.1X, two widely implemented standards that are the foundation of many network 
access control systems. 
The remainder of the chapter deals with cloud security. We begin with an 
overview 
of cloud computing, and follow this with a discussion of cloud security 
issues. 
5.1 Network Access Control 
Network access control (NAC) is an umbrella term for managing access to a 
network. 
NAC authenticates users logging into the network and determines what 
data they can access and actions they can perform. NAC also examines the health of 
the user’s computer or mobile device (the endpoints). 
Elements of a Network Access Control System 
NAC systems deal with three categories of components: 
■■ Access requestor (AR): The AR is the node that is attempting to access the 
network and may be any device that is managed by the NAC system, including 
workstations, servers, printers, cameras, and other IP-enabled devices. ARs are 
also referred to as supplicants, or simply, clients. 
■■ Policy server: Based on the AR’s posture and an enterprise’s defined policy, 
the policy server determines what access should be granted. The policy server 
often relies on backend systems, including antivirus, patch management, or a 
user directory, to help determine the host’s condition. 
Learning Objectives 
After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 
◆ ◆ Discuss the principal elements of a network access control system. 
◆ ◆ Discuss the principal network access enforcement methods. 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of the Extensible Authentication Protocol. 
◆ ◆ Understand the operation and role of the IEEE 802.1X Port-Based 
Network 
Access Control mechanism. 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of cloud computing concepts. 
◆ ◆ Understand the unique security issues related to cloud computing. 

162 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
■■ Network access server (NAS): The NAS functions as an access control point 
for users in remote locations connecting to an enterprise’s internal network. 
Also called a media gateway, a remote access server (RAS), or a policy server, 
an NAS may include its own authentication services or rely on a separate 
authentication 
service from the policy server. 
Figure 5.1 is a generic network access diagram. A variety of different ARs 
seek access to an enterprise network by applying to some type of NAS. The first 
step is generally to authenticate the AR. Authentication typically involves some 
sort of secure protocol and the use of cryptographic keys. Authentication may be 
performed by the NAS, or the NAS may mediate the authentication process. In the 
latter case, authentication takes place between the supplicant and an authentication 
server that is part of the policy server or that is accessed by the policy server. 
The authentication process serves a number of purposes. It verifies a supplicant’s 
claimed identity, which enables the policy server to determine what access 
privileges, if any, the AR may have. The authentication exchange may result in the 
Figure 5.1 Network Access Control Context 
Supplicants 
Network access servers 
Authentication 
server 
DHCP 
server 
VLAN 
server 
Policy 
server 
Patch 
management 
Network 
resources 
Quarantine 
network 
Antivirus Antispyware 
Enterprise network 

5.1 / Network Acc ess Control 163 
establishment of session keys to enable future secure communication between the 
supplicant and resources on the enterprise network. 
Typically, the policy server or a supporting server will perform checks on the 
AR to determine if it should be permitted interactive remote access connectivity. 
These checks—sometimes called health, suitability, screening, or assessment 
checks—require software on the user’s system to verify compliance with certain 
requirements 
from the organization’s secure configuration baseline. For example, 
the user’s antimalware software must be up-to-date, the operating system must 
be fully patched, and the remote computer must be owned and controlled by the 
organization. 
These checks should be performed before granting the AR access to 
the enterprise network. 
Based on the results of these checks, the organization can 
determine whether the remote computer should be permitted to use interactive 
remote 
access. If the user has acceptable authorization credentials but the remote 
computer does not pass the health check, the user and remote computer should be 
denied network access or have limited access to a quarantine network so that authorized 
personnel can fix the security deficiencies. Figure 5.1 indicates that the quarantine 
portion of the enterprise network consists of the policy server and related 
AR suitability servers. There may also be application servers that do not require the 
normal security threshold be met. 
Once an AR has been authenticated and cleared for a certain level of access 
to the enterprise network, the NAS can enable the AR to interact with resources in 
the enterprise network. The NAS may mediate every exchange to enforce a security 
policy for this AR, or may use other methods to limit the privileges of the AR. 
Network Access Enforcement Methods 
Enforcement methods are the actions that are applied to ARs to regulate access 
to the enterprise network. Many vendors support multiple enforcement methods 
simultaneously, allowing the customer to tailor the configuration by using one or a 
combination of methods. The following are common NAC enforcement methods. 
■■ IEEE 802.1X: This is a link layer protocol that enforces authorization before 
a port is assigned an IP address. IEEE 802.1X makes use of the Extensible 
Authentication Protocol for the authentication process. Sections 5.2 and 5.3 
cover the Extensible Authentication Protocol and IEEE 802.1X, respectively. 
■■ Virtual local area networks (VLANs): In this approach, the enterprise network, 
consisting of an interconnected set of LANs, is segmented logically into 
a number of virtual LANs.1 The NAC system decides to which of the network’s 
VLANs it will direct an AR, based on whether the device needs security remediation, 
Internet access only, or some level of network access to enterprise 
resources. 
VLANs can be created dynamically and VLAN membership, of 
both enterprise servers and ARs, may overlap. That is, an enterprise server or 
an AR may belong to more than one VLAN. 
1A VLAN is a logical subgroup within a LAN that is created via software rather than manually moving 
cables in the wiring closet. It combines user stations and network devices into a single unit regardless 
of the physical LAN segment they are attached to and allows traffic to flow more efficiently within 
populations 
of mutual interest. VLANs are implemented in port-switching hubs and LAN switches. 

164 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
■■ Firewall: A firewall provides a form of NAC by allowing or denying network 
traffic between an enterprise host and an external user. Firewalls are discussed 
in Chapter 12. 
■■ DHCP management: The Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) is 
an Internet protocol that enables dynamic allocation of IP addresses to hosts. 
A DHCP server intercepts DHCP requests and assigns IP addresses instead. 
Thus, NAC enforcement occurs at the IP layer based on subnet and IP assignment. 
A DCHP server is easy to install and configure, but is subject to various 
forms of IP spoofing, providing limited security. 
There are a number of other enforcement methods available from vendors. 
The ones in the preceding list are perhaps the most common, and IEEE 802.1X is by 
far the most commonly implemented solution. 
5.2 E xtensible Authentication Protocol 
The Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), defined in RFC 3748, acts as a 
framework for network access and authentication protocols. EAP provides a set of 
protocol messages that can encapsulate various authentication methods to be used 
between a client and an authentication server. EAP can operate over a variety of 
network and link level facilities, including point-to-point links, LANs, and other 
networks, and can accommodate the authentication needs of the various links and 
networks. Figure 5.2 illustrates the protocol layers that form the context for EAP. 
Authentication Methods 
EAP supports multiple authentication methods. This is what is meant by referring 
to EAP as extensible. EAP provides a generic transport service for the exchange of 
authentication 
information between a client system and an authentication server. 
The basic EAP transport service is extended by using a specific authentication protocol, 
or method, that is installed in both the EAP client and the authentication server. 
Figure 5.2 EAP Layered Context 
Authentication 
methods 
EAP 
layer 
Data link 
layer 
Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) 
IEEE 802.1X 
EAP over LAN (EAPOL) 
EAPTLS 
EAPTTLS 
EAPPSK 
EAPIKEv2 
PPP 802.3 
Ethernet 
802.11 
WLAN Other 
Other 

5.2 / Extens ible Authentica tion Protocol 165 
Numerous methods have been defined to work over EAP. The following are 
commonly supported EAP methods: 
■■ EAP-TLS (EAP Transport Layer Security): EAP-TLS (RFC 5216) defines 
how the TLS protocol (described in Chapter 6) can be encapsulated in EAP 
messages. EAP-TLS uses the handshake protocol in TLS, not its encryption 
method. Client and server authenticate each other using digital certificates. 
Client generates a pre-master secret key by encrypting a random number with 
the server’s public key and sends it to the server. Both client and server use the 
pre-master to generate the same secret key. 
■■ EAP-TTLS (EAP Tunneled TLS): EAP-TTLS is like EAP-TLS, except only 
the server has a certificate to authenticate itself to the client first. As in EAPTLS, 
a secure connection (the “tunnel”) is established with secret keys, but 
that connection is used to continue the authentication process by authenticating 
the client and possibly the server again using any EAP method or 
legacy method such as PAP (Password Authentication Protocol) and CHAP 
(Challenge-Handshake Authentication Protocol). EAP-TTLS is defined in 
RFC 5281. 
■■ EAP-GPSK (EAP Generalized Pre-Shared Key): EAP-GPSK, defined in 
RFC 5433, is an EAP method for mutual authentication and session key derivation 
using a Pre-Shared Key (PSK). EAP-GPSK specifies an EAP method 
based on pre-shared keys and employs secret key-based cryptographic algorithms. 
Hence, this method is efficient in terms of message flows and computational 
costs, but requires the existence of pre-shared keys between each 
peer and EAP server. The set up of these pairwise secret keys is part of the 
peer registration, and thus, must satisfy the system preconditions. It provides 
a protected communication channel when mutual authentication is successful 
for both parties to communicate over and is designed for authentication 
over insecure networks such as IEEE 802.11. EAP-GPSK does not require 
any public-key cryptography. The EAP method protocol exchange is done in a 
minimum of four messages. 
■■ EAP-IKEv2: It is based on the Internet Key Exchange protocol version 2 
(IKEv2), which is described in Chapter 9. It supports mutual authentication 
and session key establishment using a variety of methods. EAP-TLS is defined 
in RFC 5106. 
EAP Exchanges 
Whatever method is used for authentication, the authentication information and 
authentication protocol information are carried in EAP messages. 
RFC 3748 defines the goal of the exchange of EAP messages to be successful 
authentication. In the context of RFC 3748, successful authentication is an exchange 
of EAP messages, as a result of which the authenticator decides to allow access 
by the peer, and the peer decides to use this access. The authenticator’s decision 
typically 
involves both authentication and authorization aspects; the peer may 
successfully 
authenticate to the authenticator, but access may be denied by the 
authenticator 
due to policy reasons. 

166 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
Figure 5.3 indicates a typical arrangement in which EAP is used. The following 
components are involved: 
■■ EAP peer: Client computer that is attempting to access a network. 
■■ EAP authenticator: An access point or NAS that requires EAP authentication 
prior to granting access to a network. 
 
■■ Authentication server: A server computer that negotiates the use of a specific 
EAP method with an EAP peer, validates the EAP peer’s credentials, and 
authorizes 
access to the network. Typically, the authentication server is a 
Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service (RADIUS) server. 
The authentication server functions as a backend server that can authenticate 
peers as a service to a number of EAP authenticators. The EAP authenticator 
then makes the decision of whether to grant access. This is referred to as the 
EAP pass-
through mode. Less commonly, the authenticator takes over the role of 
the EAP server; that is, only two parties are involved in the EAP execution. 
As a first step, a lower-level protocol, such as PPP (point-to-point protocol) 
or IEEE 802.1X, is used to connect to the EAP authenticator. The software entity 
in the EAP peer that operates at this level is referred to as the supplicant. EAP 
messages 
containing the appropriate information for a chosen EAP method are 
then exchanged between the EAP peer and the authentication server. 
EAP messages may include the following fields: 
■■ Code: Identifies the Type of EAP message. The codes are Request (1), 
Response (2), Success (3), and Failure (4). 
■■ Identifier: Used to match Responses with Requests. 
■■ Length: Indicates the length, in octets, of the EAP message, including the 
Code, Identifier, Length, and Data fields. 
Figure 5.3 EAP Protocol Exchanges 
Method 
EAP peer/ 
authenticator 
EAP layer 
Lower layer 
EAP 
authenticator 
EAP layer 
Lower layer 
Method 
EAP peer/ 
authenticator 
EAP layer 
Lower layer 
RADIUS 
EAP 
messages 
EAP 
messages 
802.1X, 
PPP 
EAP peer 
EAP authenticator Authentication server 
(RADIUS) 

5.2 / Extens ible Authentica tion Protocol 167 
■■ Data: Contains information related to authentication. Typically, the Data field 
consists of a Type subfield, indicating the type of data carried, and a Type-Data 
field. 
The Success and Failure messages do not include a Data field. 
The EAP authentication exchange proceeds as follows. After a lower-level 
exchange that established the need for an EAP exchange, the authenticator sends a 
Request to the peer to request an identity, and the peer sends a Response with the 
identity information. This is followed by a sequence of Requests by the authenticator 
and Responses by the peer for the exchange of authentication information. The 
information exchanged and the number of Request–Response exchanges needed 
depend on the authentication method. The conversation continues until either 
(1) the authenticator determines that it cannot authenticate the peer and transmits 
an EAP Failure or (2) the authenticator determines that successful authentication 
has occurred and transmits an EAP Success. 
Figure 5.4 gives an example of an EAP exchange. Not shown in the figure is a 
message or signal sent from the EAP peer to the authenticator using some protocol 
other than EAP and requesting an EAP exchange to grant network access. One 
protocol used for this purpose is IEEE 802.1X, discussed in the next section. The 
first pair of EAP Request and Response messages is of Type identity, in which the 
authenticator requests the peer’s identity, and the peer returns its claimed identity 
in the Response message. This Response is passed through the authenticator to the 
authentication server. Subsequent EAP messages are exchanged between the peer 
and the authentication server. 
Figure 5.4 EAP Message Flow in Pass-Through Mode 
EAP peer 
EAP-Response/Identity 
EAP-Request/Identity 
EAP authenticator Authentication server 
(RADIUS) 
EAP-Response/Auth 
EAP-Request/Auth 
EAP-Response/Auth 
EAP-Request/Auth 
EAP-Success/Failure 

168 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
Upon receiving the identity Response message from the peer, the server 
selects 
an EAP method and sends the first EAP message with a Type field related 
to an authentication method. If the peer supports and accepts the selected EAP 
method, it replies with the corresponding Response message of the same type. 
Otherwise, the peer sends a NAK, and the EAP server either selects another EAP 
method or aborts the EAP execution with a failure message. The selected EAP 
method determines the number of Request/Response pairs. During the exchange 
the appropriate authentication information, including key material, is exchanged. 
The exchange ends when the server determines that authentication has succeeded 
or that no further attempt can be made and authentication has failed. 
5.3 IE 802.1X Port-Ba sed Network Access Control 
IEEE 802.1X Port-Based Network Access Control was designed to provide access 
control functions for LANs. Table 5.1 briefly defines key terms used in the IEEE 
802.11 standard. The terms supplicant, network access point, and authentication 
Authenticator 
An entity at one end of a point-to-point LAN segment that facilities authentication of the entity to the other 
end of the link. 
Authentication exchange 
The two-party conversation between systems performing an authentication process. 
Authentication process 
The cryptographic operations and supporting data frames that perform the actual authentication. 
Authentication server (AS) 
An entity that provides an authentication service to an authenticator. This service determines, from the 
credentials 
provided by supplicant, whether the supplicant is authorized to access the services provided by 
the system in which the authenticator resides. 
Authentication transport 
The datagram session that actively transfers the authentication exchange between two systems. 
Bridge port 
A port of an IEEE 802.1D or 802.1Q bridge. 
Edge port 
A bridge port attached to a LAN that has no other bridges attached to it. 
Network access port 
A point of attachment of a system to a LAN. It can be a physical port, such as a single LAN MAC attached to 
a physical LAN segment, or a logical port, for example, an IEEE 802.11 association between a station and an 
access point. 
Port access entity (PAE) 
The protocol entity associated with a port. It can support the protocol functionality associated with the 
authenticator, the supplicant, or both. 
Supplicant 
An entity at one end of a point-to-point LAN segment that seeks to be authenticated by an authenticator 
attached to the other end of that link. 
Table 5.1 Terminology Related to IEEE 802.1X 

5.3 / IE 802.1X Port-Bas ed Network Acc ess Control 169 
server correspond to the EAP terms peer, authenticator, and authentication server, 
respectively. 
Until the AS authenticates a supplicant (using an authentication protocol), 
the authenticator only passes control and authentication messages between the supplicant 
and the AS; the 802.1X control channel is unblocked, but the 802.11 data 
channel is blocked. Once a supplicant is authenticated and keys are provided, the 
authenticator can forward data from the supplicant, subject to predefined access 
control limitations for the supplicant to the network. Under these circumstances, 
the data channel is unblocked. 
As indicated in Figure 5.5, 802.1X uses the concepts of controlled and uncontrolled 
ports. Ports are logical entities defined within the authenticator and refer to 
physical network connections. Each logical port is mapped to one of these two types 
of physical ports. An uncontrolled port allows the exchange of protocol data units 
(PDUs) between the supplicant and the AS, regardless of the authentication state 
of the supplicant. A controlled port allows the exchange of PDUs between a supplicant 
and other systems on the network only if the current state of the supplicant 
authorizes such an exchange. 
The essential element defined in 802.1X is a protocol known as EAPOL (EAP 
over LAN). EAPOL operates at the network layers and makes use of an IEEE 802 
LAN, such as Ethernet or Wi-Fi, at the link level. EAPOL enables a supplicant to 
communicate with an authenticator and supports the exchange of EAP packets for 
authentication. 
Figure 5.5 802.1X Access Control 
Supplicant 
Network 
access point 
Uncontrolled 
port 
Controlled 
port 
Authentication server 
Network or Internet 

170 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
The most common EAPOL packets are listed in Table 5.2. When the supplicant 
first connects to the LAN, it does not know the MAC address of the authenticator. 
Actually it doesn’t know whether there is an authenticator present at all. By sending 
an EAPOL-Start packet to a special group-multicast address reserved 
for IEEE 
802.1X authenticators, a supplicant can determine whether an authenticator is present 
and let it know that the supplicant is ready. In many cases, the authenticator will 
already be notified that a new device has connected from some hardware notification. 
For example, a hub knows that a cable is plugged in before the device sends 
any data. In this case the authenticator may preempt the Start message with its own 
message. In either case the authenticator sends an EAP-
Request Identity message 
encapsulated in an EAPOL-EAP packet. The EAPOL-EAP is the EAPOL frame 
type used for transporting EAP packets. 
The authenticator uses the EAP-Key packet to send cryptographic keys to the 
supplicant once it has decided to admit it to the network. The EAP-Logoff packet 
type indicates that the supplicant wishes to be disconnected from the network. 
The EAPOL packet format includes the following fields: 
■■ Protocol version: version of EAPOL. 
■■ Packet type: indicates start, EAP, key, logoff, etc. 
■■ Packet body length: If the packet includes a body, this field indicates the body 
length. 
■■ Packet body: The payload for this EAPOL packet. An example is an EAP 
packet. 
Figure 5.6 shows an example of exchange using EAPOL. In Chapter 7, we 
examine the use of EAP and EAPOL in the context of IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN 
security. 
5.4 C loud Computing 
There is an increasingly prominent trend in many organizations to move a substantial 
portion of or even all information technology (IT) operations to an Internetconnected 
infrastructure known as enterprise cloud computing. This section 
provides 
an overview of cloud computing. For a more detailed treatment, see [STAL16b]. 
Frame Type Definition 
EAPOL-EAP Contains an encapsulated EAP packet. 
EAPOL-Start A supplicant can issue this packet instead of waiting for 
a challenge from the authenticator. 
EAPOL-Logoff Used to return the state of the port to unauthorized when 
the supplicant is finished using the network. 
EAPOL-Key Used to exchange cryptographic keying information. 
Table 5.2 Common EAPOL Frame Types 

5.4 / Cloud Computing 171 
Cloud Computing Elements 
NIST defines cloud computing, in NIST SP 800-145 (The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing), as follows: 
Figure 5.6 Example Timing Diagram for IEEE 802.1X 
EAP peer 
EAPOL-Start 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Identity) 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Identity) 
EAP authenticator Authentication server 
(RADIUS) 
EAPOL-Logo 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Auth) 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Auth) 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Response/Auth) 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Request/Auth) 
EAPOL-EAP (EAP-Success) 
Cloud computing: A model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released 
with minimal management effort or service provider interaction. This 
cloud model promotes availability and is composed of five essential characteristics, 
three service models, and four deployment models. 
The definition refers to various models and characteristics, whose relationship is 
illustrated 
in Figure 5.7. The essential characteristics of cloud computing include the 
following: 
■■ Broad network access: Capabilities are available over the network and 
accessed 
through standard mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous 

172 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
thin or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, laptops, and PDAs) as well 
as other traditional or cloud-based software services. 
■■ Rapid elasticity: Cloud computing gives you the ability to expand and reduce 
resources according to your specific service requirement. For example, you 
may need a large number of server resources for the duration of a specific task. 
You can then release these resources upon completion of the task. 
■■ Measured service: Cloud systems automatically control and optimize resource 
use by leveraging a metering capability at some level of abstraction appropriate 
to the type of service (e.g., storage, processing, bandwidth, and active user 
accounts). Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and reported, providing 
transparency for both the provider and consumer of the utilized service. 
■■ On-demand self-service: A consumer can unilaterally provision computing 
capabilities, 
such as server time and network storage, as needed automatically 
without requiring human interaction with each service provider. Because 
the service is on demand, the resources are not permanent parts of your IT 
infrastructure. 
■■ Resource pooling: The provider’s computing resources are pooled to serve 
multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model, with different physical and 
virtual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned according to consumer 
demand. There is a degree of location independence in that the customer 
Figure 5.7 Cloud Computing Elements 
Broad 
Network Access 
Resource Pooling 
Rapid 
Elasticity 
Essential 
Characteristics 
Service 
Models 
Deployment 
Models 
Measured 
Service 
On-Demand 
Self-Service 
Public Private Hybrid Community 
Software as a Service (SaaS) 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 

5.4 / Cloud Computing 173 
generally 
has no control or knowledge of the exact location of the provided 
resources, but may be able to specify location at a higher level of abstraction 
(e.g., country, state, or data center). Examples of resources include storage, 
processing, memory, network bandwidth, and virtual machines. Even private 
clouds tend to pool resources between different parts of the same organization. 
NIST defines three service models, which can be viewed as nested service 
alternatives: 
■■ Software as a service (SaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is to use 
the provider’s applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications 
are accessible from various client devices through a thin client interface such as 
a Web browser. Instead of obtaining desktop and server licenses for software 
products it uses, an enterprise obtains the same functions from the cloud service. 
SaaS saves the complexity of software installation, maintenance, upgrades, and 
patches. Examples of services at this level are Gmail, Google’s e-mail service, 
and Salesforce.com, which helps firms keep track of their customers. 
■■ Platform as a service (PaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is to 
deploy 
onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications 
created using programming languages and tools supported by the provider. 
PaaS often provides middleware-style services such as database and 
component services for use by applications. In effect, PaaS is an operating 
system 
in the cloud. 
■■ Infrastructure as a service (IaaS): The capability provided to the consumer is 
to provision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing 
resources where the consumer is able to deploy and run arbitrary software, 
which can include operating systems and applications. IaaS enables customers 
to combine basic computing services, such as number crunching and data 
storage, 
to build highly adaptable computer systems. 
NIST defines four deployment models: 
■■ Public cloud: The cloud infrastructure is made available to the general public 
or a large industry group and is owned by an organization selling cloud services. 
The cloud provider is responsible both for the cloud infrastructure and 
for the control of data and operations within the cloud. 
■■ Private cloud: The cloud infrastructure is operated solely for an organization. 
It may be managed by the organization or a third party and may exist on premise 
or off premise. The cloud provider (CP) is responsible only for the infrastructure 
and not for the control. 
■■ Community cloud: The cloud infrastructure is shared by several organizations 
and supports a specific community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security 
requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). It may be managed by the 
organizations or a third party and may exist on premise or off premise. 
■■ Hybrid cloud: The cloud infrastructure is a composition of two or more clouds 
(private, community, or public) that remain unique entities but are bound 
together 
by standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and 
application 
portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load balancing between clouds). 

174 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
Figure 5.8 illustrates the typical cloud service context. An enterprise maintains 
workstations within an enterprise LAN or set of LANs, which are connected by a 
router through a network or the Internet to the cloud service provider. The cloud 
service provider maintains a massive collection of servers, which it manages with a 
variety of network management, redundancy, and security tools. In the figure, 
the 
cloud infrastructure is shown as a collection of blade servers, which is a common 
architecture. 
Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
NIST SP 500-292 (NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture) establishes a 
reference 
architecture, described as follows: 
Figure 5.8 Cloud Computing Context 
Router 
Servers 
LAN 
switch 
Cloud 
service 
provider 
Network 
or Internet 
Router 
LAN 
switch 
Enterprise 
(Cloud user) 
The NIST cloud computing reference architecture focuses on the requirements 
of “what” cloud services provide, not a “how to” design solution and implementation. 
The reference architecture is intended to facilitate the understanding of 
the operational intricacies in cloud computing. It does not represent the system 
architecture of a specific cloud computing system; instead it is a tool for describing, 
discussing, and developing a system-specific architecture using a common 
framework of reference. 

5.4 / Cloud Computing 175 
NIST developed the reference architecture with the following objectives 
in mind: 
■■ to illustrate and understand the various cloud services in the context of an 
overall cloud computing conceptual model 
■■ to provide a technical reference for consumers to understand, discuss, categorize, 
and compare cloud services 
■■ to facilitate the analysis of candidate standards for security, interoperability, 
and portability and reference implementations 
The reference architecture, depicted in Figure 5.9, defines five major actors in 
terms of the roles and responsibilities: 
■■ Cloud consumer: A person or organization that maintains a business relationship 
with, and uses service from, cloud providers. 
■■ Cloud provider: A person, organization, or entity responsible for making a 
service 
available to interested parties. 
■■ Cloud auditor: A party that can conduct independent assessment of cloud 
services, 
information system operations, performance, and security of the 
cloud implementation. 
■■ Cloud broker: An entity that manages the use, performance, and delivery of 
cloud services, and negotiates relationships between CPs and cloud consumers. 
■■ Cloud carrier: An intermediary that provides connectivity and transport of 
cloud services from CPs to cloud consumers. 
The roles of the cloud consumer and provider have already been discussed. To 
summarize, a cloud provider can provide one or more of the cloud services to meet 
IT and business requirements of cloud consumers. For each of the three service 
Figure 5.9 NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture 
Cloud 
consumer 
Cloud 
auditor 
Service 
intermediation 
Service 
aggregation 
Service 
arbitrage 
Cloud 
broker 
Cloud provider 
Security 
audit 
Performance 
audit 
Privacy 
impact audit 
SaaS 
Service layer 
Service orchestration Cloud 
service 
management 
PaaS 
Hardware 
Physical resource layer 
Facility 
Resource abstraction 
and control layer 
IaaS 
Business 
support 
Provisioning/ 
conguration 
Portability/ 
interoperability 
Security 
Privacy 
Cloud carrier 

176 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
models (SaaS, PaaS, IaaS), the CP provides the storage and processing facilities 
needed to support that service model, together with a cloud interface for cloud 
service 
consumers. For SaaS, the CP deploys, configures, maintains, and updates 
the operation of the software applications on a cloud infrastructure so that the 
services 
are provisioned at the expected service levels to cloud consumers. The 
consumers of SaaS can be organizations that provide their members with access to 
software applications, 
end users who directly use software applications, or software 
application 
administrators who configure applications for end users. 
For PaaS, the CP manages the computing infrastructure for the platform and 
runs the cloud software that provides the components of the platform, such as runtime 
software execution stack, databases, and other middleware components. Cloud 
consumers of PaaS can employ the tools and execution resources provided by CPs to 
develop, test, deploy, and manage the applications hosted in a cloud environment. 
For IaaS, the CP acquires the physical computing resources underlying the 
service, 
including the servers, networks, storage, and hosting infrastructure. The 
IaaS cloud consumer in turn uses these computing resources, such as a virtual 
computer, 
for their fundamental computing needs. 
The cloud carrier is a networking facility that provides connectivity and transport 
of cloud services between cloud consumers and CPs. Typically, a CP will set up 
service level agreements (SLAs) with a cloud carrier to provide services consistent 
with the level of SLAs offered to cloud consumers, and may require the cloud carrier 
to provide dedicated and secure connections between cloud consumers and CPs. 
A cloud broker is useful when cloud services are too complex for a cloud consumer 
to easily manage. Three areas of support can be offered by a cloud broker: 
■■ Service intermediation: These are value-added services, such as identity management, 
performance reporting, and enhanced security. 
■■ Service aggregation: The broker combines multiple cloud services to meet 
consumer needs not specifically addressed by a single CP, or to optimize performance 
or minimize cost. 
■■ Service arbitrage: This is similar to service aggregation except that the services 
being aggregated are not fixed. Service arbitrage means a broker has the flexibility 
to choose services from multiple agencies. The cloud broker, for example, can 
use a credit-scoring service to measure and select an agency with the best score. 
A cloud auditor can evaluate the services provided by a CP in terms of security 
controls, privacy impact, performance, and so on. The auditor is an independent 
entity that can assure that the CP conforms to a set of standards. 
5.5 C loud Security Risks an d Countermeasures 
In general terms, security controls in cloud computing are similar to the security 
controls in any IT environment. However, because of the operational models and 
technologies used to enable cloud service, cloud computing may present risks that 
are specific to the cloud environment. The essential concept in this regard is that 
the enterprise loses a substantial amount of control over resources, services, and 
applications 
but must maintain accountability for security and privacy policies. 

5.5 / Cloud Security Risks an d Countermeas ures 177 
The Cloud Security Alliance [CSA10] lists the following as the top cloud-specific 
security threats, together with suggested countermeasures: 
■■ Abuse and nefarious use of cloud computing: For many CPs, it is relatively 
easy to register and begin using cloud services, some even offering free limited 
trial periods. This enables attackers to get inside the cloud to conduct various 
attacks, such as spamming, malicious code attacks, and denial of service. PaaS 
providers have traditionally suffered most from this kind of attacks; however, 
recent evidence shows that hackers have begun to target IaaS vendors as well. 
The burden is on the CP to protect against such attacks, but cloud service clients 
must monitor activity with respect to their data and resources to detect 
any malicious behavior. 
Countermeasures include (1) stricter initial registration and validation 
processes; 
(2) enhanced credit card fraud monitoring and coordination; 
(3) comprehensive introspection of customer network traffic; and (4) monitoring 
public blacklists for one’s own network blocks. 
■■ Insecure interfaces and APIs: CPs expose a set of software interfaces or APIs 
that customers use to manage and interact with cloud services. The security 
and availability of general cloud services are dependent upon the security of 
these basic APIs. From authentication and access control to encryption and 
activity monitoring, these interfaces must be designed to protect against both 
accidental and malicious attempts to circumvent policy. 
Countermeasures include (1) analyzing the security model of CP interfaces; 
(2) ensuring that strong authentication and access controls are implemented 
in concert with encrypted transmission; and (3) understanding the 
dependency 
chain associated with the API. 
■■ Malicious insiders: Under the cloud computing paradigm, an organization 
relinquishes 
direct control over many aspects of security and, in doing so, confers 
an unprecedented level of trust onto the CP. One grave concern is the 
risk of malicious insider activity. Cloud architectures necessitate certain roles 
that are extremely high risk. Examples include CP system administrators and 
managed 
security service providers. 
Countermeasures include the following: (1) enforce strict supply chain 
management and conduct a comprehensive supplier assessment; (2) specify 
human resource requirements as part of legal contract; (3) require transparency 
into overall information security and management practices, as well as 
compliance reporting; and (4) determine security breach notification processes. 
■■ Shared technology issues: IaaS vendors deliver their services in a scalable way 
by sharing infrastructure. Often, the underlying components that make up this 
infrastructure (CPU caches, GPUs, etc.) were not designed to offer strong isolation 
properties for a multi-tenant architecture. CPs typically approach this 
risk by the use of isolated virtual machines for individual clients. This approach 
is still vulnerable to attack, by both insiders and outsiders, and so can only be a 
part of an overall security strategy. 
Countermeasures include the following: (1) implement security best 
practices for installation/configuration; (2) monitor environment for unauthorized 
changes/activity; (3) promote strong authentication and access control 

178 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
for administrative 
access and operations; (4) enforce SLAs for patching 
and 
vulnerability 
remediation; and (5) conduct vulnerability scanning and configuration 
audits. 
■■ Data loss or leakage: For many clients, the most devastating impact from a 
security breach is the loss or leakage of data. We address this issue in the next 
subsection. 
Countermeasures include the following: (1) implement strong API 
access 
control; 
(2) encrypt and protect integrity of data in transit; (3) analyze 
data protection at both design and run time; and (4) implement strong key 
generation, 
storage and management, and destruction practices. 
■■ Account or service hijacking: Account or service hijacking, usually with stolen 
credentials, remains a top threat. With stolen credentials, attackers can often 
access critical areas of deployed cloud computing services, allowing them to 
compromise the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of those services. 
Countermeasures include the following: (1) prohibit the sharing of 
account 
credentials between users and services; (2) leverage strong two-factor 
authentication techniques where possible; (3) employ proactive monitoring 
to detect unauthorized activity; and (4) understand CP security policies 
and SLAs. 
■■ Unknown risk profile: In using cloud infrastructures, the client necessarily 
cedes control to the CP on a number of issues that may affect security. Thus 
the client must pay attention to and clearly define the roles and responsibilities 
involved for managing risks. For example, employees may deploy applications 
and data resources at the CP without observing the normal policies and 
procedures for privacy, security, and oversight. 
Countermeasures include (1) disclosure of applicable logs and data; 
(2) partial/full disclosure of infrastructure details (e.g., patch levels and 
firewalls); 
and (3) monitoring and alerting on necessary information. 
Similar lists have been developed by the European Network and Information 
Security Agency [ENIS09] and NIST [JANS11]. 
5.6 Da ta Protection in the Cloud 
As can be seen from the previous section, there are numerous aspects to cloud 
security 
and numerous approaches to providing cloud security measures. 
A further 
example is seen in the NIST guidelines for cloud security, specified in 
SP-800-14 and listed in Table 5.3. Thus, the topic of cloud security is well beyond 
the scope of this chapter. In this section, we focus on one specific element of 
cloud security. 
There are many ways to compromise data. Deletion or alteration of records 
without a backup of the original content is an obvious example. Unlinking a record 
from a larger context may render it unrecoverable, as can storage on unreliable 
media. Loss of an encoding key may result in effective destruction. Finally, unauthorized 
parties must be prevented from gaining access to sensitive data. 

5.6 / Da ta Protection in the Cloud 179 
Governance 
Extend organizational practices pertaining to the policies, procedures, and standards used for application 
development and service provisioning in the cloud, as well as the design, implementation, testing, use, and 
monitoring of deployed or engaged services. 
Put in place audit mechanisms and tools to ensure organizational practices are followed throughout the 
system life cycle. 
Compliance 
Understand the various types of laws and regulations that impose security and privacy obligations on the 
organization 
and potentially impact cloud computing initiatives, particularly those involving data location, 
privacy 
and security controls, records management, and electronic discovery requirements. 
Review and assess the cloud provider’s offerings with respect to the organizational requirements to be met 
and ensure that the contract terms adequately meet the requirements. 
Ensure that the cloud provider’s electronic discovery capabilities and processes do not compromise the 
privacy 
or security of data and applications. 
Trust 
Ensure that service arrangements have sufficient means to allow visibility into the security and privacy 
controls 
and processes employed by the cloud provider, and their performance over time. 
Establish clear, exclusive ownership rights over data. 
Institute a risk management program that is flexible enough to adapt to the constantly evolving and 
shifting 
risk landscape for the life cycle of the system. 
Continuously monitor the security state of the information system to support ongoing risk management 
decisions. 
Architecture 
Understand the underlying technologies that the cloud provider uses to provision services, including the 
implications 
that the technical controls involved have on the security and privacy of the system, over the full 
system life cycle and across all system components. 
Identity and access management 
Ensure that adequate safeguards are in place to secure authentication, authorization, and other identity and 
access management functions, and are suitable for the organization. 
Software isolation 
Understand virtualization and other logical isolation techniques that the cloud provider employs in its 
multi-
tenant software architecture, and assess the risks involved for the organization. 
Data protection 
Evaluate the suitability of the cloud provider’s data management solutions for the organizational data 
concerned 
and the ability to control access to data, to secure data while at rest, in transit, and in use, and to 
sanitize data. 
Take into consideration the risk of collating organizational data with those of other organizations whose 
threat profiles are high or whose data collectively represent significant concentrated value. 
Fully understand and weigh the risks involved in cryptographic key management with the facilities 
available 
in the cloud environment and the processes established by the cloud provider. 
Availability 
Understand the contract provisions and procedures for availability, data backup and recovery, and disaster 
recovery, and ensure that they meet the organization’s continuity and contingency planning requirements. 
Ensure that during an intermediate or prolonged disruption or a serious disaster, critical operations 
can be immediately resumed, and that all operations can be eventually reinstituted in a timely and organized 
manner. 
Incident response 
Understand the contract provisions and procedures for incident response and ensure that they meet the 
requirements of the organization. 
Table 5.3 NIST Guidelines on Security and Privacy Issues and Recommendations 

180 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
Ensure that the cloud provider has a transparent response process in place and sufficient mechanisms to 
share information during and after an incident. 
Ensure that the organization can respond to incidents in a coordinated fashion with the cloud provider in 
accordance with their respective roles and responsibilities for the computing environment. 
Table 5.3 Continued 
The threat of data compromise increases in the cloud, due to the number of 
and interactions between risks and challenges that are either unique to the cloud or 
more dangerous because of the architectural or operational characteristics of the 
cloud environment. 
Database environments used in cloud computing can vary significantly. Some 
providers support a multi-instance model, which provides a unique DBMS running 
on a virtual machine instance for each cloud subscriber. This gives the subscriber 
complete control over role definition, user authorization, and other administrative 
tasks related to security. Other providers support a multi-tenant model, which provides 
a predefined environment for the cloud subscriber that is shared with other 
tenants, typically through tagging data with a subscriber identifier. Tagging gives 
the appearance of exclusive use of the instance, but relies on the CP to establish and 
maintain a sound secure database environment. 
Data must be secured while at rest, in transit, and in use, and access to the 
data must be controlled. The client can employ encryption to protect data in transit, 
though this involves key management responsibilities for the CP. The client can 
enforce access control techniques but, again, the CP is involved to some extent 
depending 
on the service model used. 
For data at rest, the ideal security measure is for the client to encrypt the database 
and only store encrypted data in the cloud, with the CP having no access to the 
encryption key. So long as the key remains secure, the CP has no ability to read the 
data, although corruption and other denial-of-service attacks remain a risk. 
A straightforward solution to the security problem in this context is to encrypt 
the entire database and not provide the encryption/decryption keys to the service 
provider. This solution by itself is inflexible. The user has little ability to access 
individual 
data items based on searches or indexing on key parameters, but rather 
would have to download entire tables from the database, decrypt the tables, and 
work with the results. To provide more flexibility, it must be possible to work with 
the database in its encrypted form. 
An example of such an approach, depicted in Figure 5.10, is reported in 
[DAMI05] and [DAMI03]. A similar approach is described in [HACI02]. Four entities 
are involved: 
■■ Data owner: An organization that produces data to be made available for 
controlled 
release, either within the organization or to external users. 
■■ User: Human entity that presents requests (queries) to the system. The user 
could be an employee of the organization who is granted access to the database 
via the server, or a user external to the organization who, after authentication, 
is granted access. 
■■ Client: Frontend that transforms user queries into queries on the encrypted 
data stored on the server. 

5.6 / Da ta Protection in the Cloud 181 
■■ Server: An organization that receives the encrypted data from a data owner 
and makes them available for distribution to clients. The server could in fact 
be owned by the data owner but, more typically, is a facility owned and maintained 
by an external provider. For our discussion, the server is a cloud server. 
Before continuing this discussion, we need to define some database terms. 
In relational database parlance, the basic building block is a relation, which is a flat 
table. Rows are referred to as tuples, and columns are referred to as attributes. 
A primary key is defined to be a portion of a row used to uniquely identify a row in 
a table; the primary key consists of one or more column names.2 For example, in 
an employee table, the employee ID is sufficient to uniquely identify a row in a particular 
table. 
Let us first examine the simplest possible arrangement based on this scenario. 
Suppose that each individual item in the database is encrypted separately, all using 
the same encryption key. The encrypted database is stored at the server, but the 
server does not have the encryption key. Thus, the data are secure at the server. 
Even if someone were able to hack into the server’s system, all he or she would have 
access to is encrypted data. The client system does have a copy of the encryption 
key. A user at the client can retrieve a record from the database with the following 
sequence: 
1. The user issues a query for fields from one or more records with a specific 
value of the primary key. 
2Note that a primary key has nothing to do with cryptographic keys. A primary key in a database is a 
means of indexing into the database. 
Figure 5.10 An Encryption Scheme for a Cloud-Based Database 
Query 
processor 
1. Original query 
Metadata 
4. Plaintext 
result 
2. Transformed 
query 
3. Encrypted 
result 
Client 
User 
Data owner 
Cloud 
server 
Encrypt/ 
Decrypt 
Query 
executor 
Metadata 
Metadata 
Encrypted 
database 
Database 

182 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
2. The query processor at the client encrypts the primary key, modifies the query 
accordingly, and transmits the query to the server. 
3. The server processes the query using the encrypted value of the primary key 
and returns the appropriate record or records. 
4. The query processor decrypts the data and returns the results. 
This method is certainly straightforward but is quite limited. For example, suppose 
the Employee table contains a salary attribute and the user wishes to retrieve 
all records for salaries less than $70K. There is no obvious way to do this, because 
the attribute value for salary in each record is encrypted. The set of encrypted values 
does not preserve the ordering of values in the original attribute. 
There are a number of ways to extend the functionality of this approach. For 
example, an unencrypted index value can be associated with a given attribute and 
the table can be partitioned based on these index values, enabling a user to retrieve 
a certain portion of the table. The details of such schemes are beyond our scope. 
See [STAL15] for more detail. 
5.7 C loud Security as a Service 
The term Security as a Service (SecaaS) has generally meant a package of security 
services offered by a service provider that offloads much of the security responsibility 
from an enterprise to the security service provider. Among the services 
typically provided are authentication, antivirus, antimalware/-spyware, intrusion 
detection, and security event management. In the context of cloud computing, 
cloud security as a service, designated SecaaS, is a segment of the SaaS offering 
of a CP. 
The Cloud Security Alliance defines SecaaS as the provision of security 
applications 
and services via the cloud either to cloud-based infrastructure and software 
or from the cloud to the customers’ on-premise systems [CSA11b]. The Cloud 
Security Alliance has identified the following SecaaS categories of service: 
■■ Identity and access management 
■■ Data loss prevention 
■■ Web security 
■■ E-mail security 
■■ Security assessments 
■■ Intrusion management 
■■ Security information and event management 
■■ Encryption 
■■ Business continuity and disaster recovery 
■■ Network security 
In this section, we examine these categories with a focus on security of the 
cloud-based infrastructure and services (Figure 5.11). 

5.7 / Cloud Security as a Service 183 
Identity and access management (IAM) includes people, processes, and 
systems 
that are used to manage access to enterprise resources by assuring that the 
identity of an entity is verified, and then granting the correct level of access based 
on this assured identity. One aspect of identity management is identity provisioning, 
which has to do with providing access to identified users and subsequently 
deprovisioning, 
or deny access, to users when the client enterprise designates such 
users as no longer 
having access to enterprise resources in the cloud. Another aspect 
of identity management is for the cloud to participate in the federated identity 
management scheme (see Chapter 4) used by the client enterprise. Among other 
requirements, 
the cloud service provider (CSP) must be able to exchange identity 
attributes with the enterprise’s chosen identity provider. 
The access management portion of IAM involves authentication and access 
control services. For example, the CSP must be able to authenticate users in a 
trustworthy manner. The access control requirements in SPI environments include 
establishing trusted user profile and policy information, using it to control access 
within the cloud service, and doing this in an auditable way. 
Data loss prevention (DLP) is the monitoring, protecting, and verifying the 
security of data at rest, in motion, and in use. Much of DLP can be implemented 
Figure 5.11 Elements of Cloud Security as a Service 
Cloud service clients and adversaries 
Identity and access management 
Network security 
Data loss 
prevention 
Web security 
Intrusion 
management 
Encryption 
Email security 
Security assessments 
Security information and 
event management 
Business continuity and 
disaster recovery 

184 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
by the cloud client, such as discussed in Section 5.6. The CSP can also provide DLP 
services, such as implementing rules about what functions can be performed on data 
in various contexts. 
Web security is real-time protection offered either on premise through software/
appliance installation or via the cloud by proxying or redirecting Web traffic 
to the CP. This provides an added layer of protection on top of things like antiviruses 
to prevent malware from entering the enterprise via activities such as Web 
browsing. In addition to protecting against malware, a cloud-based Web security 
service might include usage policy enforcement, data backup, traffic control, and 
Web access control. 
A CSP may provide a Web-based e-mail service, for which security measures 
are needed. E-mail security provides control over inbound and outbound e-mail, 
protecting 
the organization from phishing, malicious attachments, enforcing corporate 
polices such as acceptable use and spam prevention. The CSP may also incorporate 
digital signatures on all e-mail clients and provide optional e-mail encryption. 
Security assessments are third-part audits of cloud services. While this service 
is outside the province of the CSP, the CSP can provide tools and access points to 
facilitate various assessment activities. 
Intrusion management encompasses intrusion detection, prevention, and 
response. 
The core of this service is the implementation of intrusion detection systems 
(IDSs) and intrusion prevention systems (IPSs) at entry points to the cloud 
and on servers in the cloud. An IDS is a set of automated tools designed to detect 
unauthorized access to a host system. We discuss this in Chapter 11. An IPS incorporates 
IDS functionality but also includes mechanisms designed to block traffic 
from intruders. 
Security information and event management (SIEM) aggregates (via push or 
pull mechanisms) log and event data from virtual and real networks, applications, 
and systems. This information is then correlated and analyzed to provide real-time 
reporting and alerting on information/events that may require intervention or other 
type of response. The CSP typically provides an integrated service that can put 
together 
information from a variety of sources both within the cloud and within the 
client enterprise network. 
Encryption is a pervasive service that can be provided for data at rest in the 
cloud, e-mail traffic, client-specific network management information, and identity 
information. Encryption services provided by the CSP involve a range of complex 
issues, including key management, how to implement virtual private network 
(VPN) services in the cloud, application encryption, and data content access. 
Business continuity and disaster recovery comprise measures and mechanisms 
to ensure operational resiliency in the event of any service interruptions. This is 
an area where the CSP, because of economies of scale, can offer obvious benefits 
to a cloud service client [WOOD10]. The CSP can provide backup at multiple 
locations, 
with reliable failover and disaster recovery facilities. This service must 
include a flexible infrastructure, redundancy of functions and hardware, monitored 
operations, 
geographically distributed data centers, and network survivability. 
Network security consists of security services that allocate access, distribute, 
monitor, and protect the underlying resource services. Services include perimeter 
and server firewalls and denial-of-service protection. Many of the other services 

5.8 / Address ing Cloud Computing Security Conc erns 185 
listed in this section, including intrusion management, identity and access management, 
data loss protection, and Web security, also contribute to the network security 
service. 
5.8 Addressing Cloud Computing Security Concerns 
Numerous documents have been developed to guide businesses thinking about the 
security issues associated with cloud computing. In addition to SP 800-144, which 
provides overall guidance, NIST has issued SP 800-146 (Cloud Computing Synopsis 
and Recommendations, May 2012). NIST’s recommendations systematically consider 
each of the major types of cloud services consumed by businesses including 
Software as a Service (SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), and Platform as 
a Service (PaaS). While security issues vary somewhat depending on the type of 
cloud service, there are multiple NIST recommendations that are independent of 
service type. Not surprisingly, NIST recommends selecting cloud providers that 
support strong encryption, have appropriate redundancy mechanisms in place, 
employ 
authentication mechanisms, and offer subscribers sufficient visibility about 
mechanisms used to protect subscribers from other subscribers and the provider. 
SP 800-146 also lists the overall security controls that are relevant in a cloud computing 
environment and that must be assigned to the different cloud actors. These 
are shown in Table 5.4. 
As more businesses incorporate cloud services into their enterprise network 
infrastructures, cloud computing security will persist as an important issue. 
Examples of cloud computing security failures have the potential to have a chilling 
effect on business interest in cloud services and this is inspiring service providers 
to be serious about incorporating security mechanisms that will allay concerns of 
potential subscribers. Some service providers have moved their operations to Tier 4 
data centers to address user concerns about availability and redundancy. Because so 
many businesses remain reluctant to embrace cloud computing in a big way, cloud 
service providers will have to continue to work hard to convince potential customers 
that computing support for core business processes and mission critical applications 
can be moved safely and securely to the cloud. 
Technical Operational Management 
Access Control 
Audit and Accountability 
Identification and Authentication 
System and Communication 
Protection 
Awareness and Training 
Configuration and Management 
Contingency Planning 
Incident Response 
Maintenance 
Media Protection 
Physical and Environmental 
Protection 
Personnel Security System and 
Information Integrity 
Certification, Accreditation, and 
Security Assessment 
Planning Risk Assessment 
System and Services Acquisition 
Table 5.4 Control Functions and Classes 

186 chapter 5 / Network Acc ess Control an d Cloud Security 
Key Terms 
access requestor (AR) 
authentication server 
cloud 
cloud auditor 
cloud broker 
cloud carrier 
cloud computing 
cloud consumer 
cloud provider 
community cloud 
Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol (DHCP) 
EAP authenticator 
EAP-GPSK 
EAP-IKEv2 
EAP over LAN (EAPOL) 
EAP method 
EAP pass-through mode 
EAP peer 
EAP-TLS 
EAP-TTLS 
Extensible Authentication 
Protocol (EAP) 
firewall 
IEEE 802.1X 
media gateway 
Network Access Control 
(NAC) 
Network Access Server 
(NAS) 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
policy server 
private cloud 
public cloud 
Remote Access Server (RAS) 
Security as a Service (SecaaS) 
Software as a Service (SaaS) 
supplicant 
Virtual Local Area Network 
(VLAN) 
5.9 K ey Terms, Review Questions, an d Problems 
Review Questions 
5.1 Provide a brief definition of network access control. 
5.2 What is an EAP? 
5.3 List and briefly define four EAP authentication methods. 
5.4 What is DHCP? How useful is it to help achieve security of IP addresses? 
5.5 Why is EAPOL an essential element of IEEE 802.1X? 
5.6 What are the essential characteristics of cloud computing? 
5.7 List and briefly define the deployment models of cloud computing. 
5.8 What is the cloud computing reference architecture? 
5.9 Describe some of the main cloud-specific security threats. 
Problems 
5.1 Investigate the network access control scheme used at your school or place of 
employment. 
Draw a diagram and describe the principal components. 
5.2 Figure 5.3 suggests that EAP can be described in the context of a four-layer model. 
Indicate the functions and formats of each of the four layers. You may need to refer 
to RFC 3748. 
5.3 List some commonly used cloud-based data services. Explore and compare these 
services 
based on their use of encryption, flexibility, efficiency, speed, and ease of 
use. Study security breaches on these services in recent past. What changes were 
made by the services after these attacks? 

