THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT FOR THE VIDEO

What are the key problems and solutions with malicious software

PARTICIPANTS

Sean Duca, Vice President Regional Chief Security Officer Asia Pacific & Japan Palo Alto Networks

Dr Vaughan Shanks, Chief Executive Officer Cydarm Technologies

[BEGINNING OF RECORDED MATERIAL]

[RMIT University logo animation]

Sean Duca: So the types of malicious software that's actually most often seen-- a range from everything 
from viruses to Trojans to a range of different types of threats that are out there-- they 
continue to keep on growing. But what we actually end up seeing, more often than not, are 
not really viruses, per se, and a virus is something that actually infects a particular file, but 
something that's more purpose-built, so a Trojan on a control infrastructure, a tool that's 
actually used to try and scrape and pull information from a system.

Vaughan Shanks: Very often, it'll execute, the moment you download it or if you're tricked into running software. 
Usually, there'll be a first-stage downloader, which is it just runs. And its basic job is to retrieve 
a second-stage downloader, which could be something like a Cobalt Strike remote access 
system. That will then usually open what we call a reverse shell and give the attacker the 
ability to execute commands on the host where the malware is installed.

Sean Duca: It's opened it up, and it then starts to go through a process of trying to work out what's the 
application, what are the vulnerabilities that you've actually got on that particular system, and 
then trying to exploit that.

Vaughan Shanks: The most common vulnerability exploited, from the user side, is actually the people, 
themselves. Most attacks rely on some degree of social engineering. You still can, now and 
again, find remote code exploitation, but it's hard.

Far easier is to just call someone on the phone and say, hello, I am from your network 
provider and we've detected malware on your computer. And I'm going to need you to instal 
TeamViewer, so that I can access your computer remotely and remove the malware for you. A 
lot of people will fall for this trick. Another one is a well-crafted email pretending to be from a 
bank or, for example, a freight company, enticing you to click on a link. And if they can fool 
you into clicking on that link and downloading some software or visiting an infected website, 
that can be the first step towards getting a foothold on a victim's computer.

Sean Duca: Countermeasures that can be used to counter malware attacks could range from, one, 
patching your applications. First and foremost, I would always recommend that as a key thing. 
Software always has to be updated, so if you think about whether it's your mobile device, 


whether it's your actual laptop, desktop, there's always updates that actually come out. And 
that's how a lot of the malware attacks typically are going to be exploited, so that's number 
one. The other one is actually using some form of security software that allows you to identify 
some brand new malicious type of code, see that has the ability to always be updated, always 
be on, and always be up to date, as you try and stop the different types of malware attacks 
that are out there.

Vaughan Shanks: One of the simplest things you can do is what I've heard referred to as a Layer 8 firewall. And 
Layer 8 is the people. So by educating people to be on their guard and to be suspicious of any 
unsolicited approaches, you can reduce the chance they'll fall victim to a social engineering 
attack.

So if they get a phone call from someone asking them to instal software, and they're not 
expecting a phone call, and they don't know who the caller is, the caller cannot verify 
themselves, then they should immediately be on their guard. Similarly, an email pretending to 
be a bank, with a link in it, that's telling you to follow the link and log into your bank account is 
probably not going to be from your bank because banks don't do that. So I'd say education is 
the first step.

Sean Duca:The skills that are actually needed to do the analysis of malicious software really come down 
to, probably, a bit of a programming background. And that really is an understanding of the 
technical constructs of how does an application work, how does a machine work. Because at 
the end of the day, a malicious software is, effectively, still software. It's actually trying to work 
out how do I tap into the operating system, how do I tap into the applications that are actually 
there, and try and work out how do I, then, exploit it. So you need to have the ability that you 
can start to understand and read machine language, number one, and also, two, work out 
how do you reverse engineer a piece of malware, as well.

Vaughan Shanks: I'd say you need to understand how programmes execute. I think being able to read source 
code is useful. Sometimes malicious software comes in the form of scripts, so being able to 
read different scripting languages and understand, roughly, what they're doing. You don't 
need to be a programmer to do this, by the way. The other more, I guess, deep technical skill 
is reverse engineering. So using a tool like IDA Pro or Ghidra, being able to go through, 
programme-- compile a programme binary, and identify which sections of the programme do 
what, and to find artefacts of interest embedded in that code.

[RMIT University logo animation]

[END OF RECORDED MATERIAL]


