230 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
■■ Either sensitive data should be prohibited from storage on the mobile device 
or it should be encrypted. 
■■ IT staff should also have the ability to remotely access devices, wipe the device 
of all data, and then disable the device in the event of loss or theft. 
■■ The organization may prohibit all installation of third-party applications, 
implement 
whitelisting to prohibit installation of all unapproved applications, 
or implement a secure sandbox that isolates the organization’s data and applications 
from all other data and applications on the mobile device. Any application 
that is on an approved list should be accompanied by a digital signature 
and a public-key certificate from an approved authority. 
■■ The organization can implement and enforce restrictions on what devices can 
synchronize and on the use of cloud-based storage. 
■■ To deal with the threat of untrusted content, security responses can include 
training of personnel on the risks inherent in untrusted content and disabling 
camera use on corporate mobile devices. 
■■ To counter the threat of malicious use of location services, the security policy 
can dictate that such service is disabled on all mobile devices. 
Traffic Security Traffic security is based on the usual mechanisms for encryption 
and authentication. All traffic should be encrypted and travel by secure means, such 
as SSL or IPv6. Virtual private networks (VPNs) can be configured so that all traffic 
between the mobile device and the organization’s network is via a VPN. 
A strong authentication protocol should be used to limit the access from the 
device to the resources of the organization. Often, a mobile device has a single 
device-
specific authenticator, because it is assumed that the device has only one 
user. A preferable strategy is to have a two-layer authentication mechanism, which 
involves authenticating the device and then authenticating the user of the device. 
Barrier Security The organization should have security mechanisms to protect 
the network from unauthorized access. The security strategy can also include firewall 
policies specific to mobile device traffic. Firewall policies can limit the scope 
of data and application access for all mobile devices. Similarly, intrusion detection 
and intrusion prevention systems can be configured to have tighter rules for mobile 
device traffic. 
7.3 IE 802.11 Wireless Lan Overview 
IEEE 802 is a committee that has developed standards for a wide range of local area 
networks (LANs). In 1990, the IEEE 802 Committee formed a new working group, 
IEEE 802.11, with a charter to develop a protocol and transmission specifications 
for wireless LANs (WLANs). Since that time, the demand for WLANs at different 
frequencies and data rates has exploded. Keeping pace with this demand, the IEEE 
802.11 working group has issued an ever-expanding list of standards. Table 7.1 
briefly defines key terms used in the IEEE 802.11 standard. 

7.3 / IE 802.11 Wireless Lan Overview 231 
The Wi-Fi Alliance 
The first 802.11 standard to gain broad industry acceptance was 802.11b. Although 
802.11b products are all based on the same standard, there is always a concern 
whether products from different vendors will successfully interoperate. To meet 
this concern, the Wireless Ethernet Compatibility Alliance (WECA), an industry 
consortium, was formed in 1999. This organization, subsequently renamed the 
Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) Alliance, created a test suite to certify interoperability for 
802.11b products. The term used for certified 802.11b products is Wi-Fi. Wi-Fi certification 
has been extended to 802.11g products. The Wi-Fi Alliance has also developed 
a certification process for 802.11a products, called Wi-Fi5. The Wi-Fi Alliance 
is concerned with a range of market areas for WLANs, including enterprise, home, 
and hot spots. 
More recently, the Wi-Fi Alliance has developed certification procedures for 
IEEE 802.11 security standards, referred to as Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA). The 
most recent version of WPA, known as WPA2, incorporates all of the features of 
the IEEE 802.11i WLAN security specification. 
IEEE 802 Protocol Architecture 
Before proceeding, we need to briefly preview the IEEE 802 protocol architecture. 
IEEE 802.11 standards are defined within the structure of a layered set of protocols. 
This structure, used for all IEEE 802 standards, is illustrated in Figure 7.3. 
Physical Layer The lowest layer of the IEEE 802 reference model is the physical 
layer, which includes such functions as encoding/decoding of signals and bit transmission/
reception. In addition, the physical layer includes a specification of the 
transmission medium. In the case of IEEE 802.11, the physical layer also defines 
frequency bands and antenna characteristics. 
Access point (AP) Any entity that has station functionality and provides access to the 
distribution system via the wireless medium for associated stations. 
Basic service set (BSS) A set of stations controlled by a single coordination function. 
Coordination function The logical function that determines when a station operating within a BSS 
is permitted to transmit and may be able to receive PDUs. 
Distribution system (DS) A system used to interconnect a set of BSSs and integrated LANs to create 
an ESS. 
Extended service set (ESS) A set of one or more interconnected BSSs and integrated LANs that 
appear as a single BSS to the LLC layer at any station associated with one 
of these BSSs. 
MAC protocol data unit 
(MPDU) 
The unit of data exchanged between two peer MAC entities using the 
services of the physical layer. 
MAC service data unit 
(MSDU) 
Information that is delivered as a unit between MAC users. 
Station Any device that contains an IEEE 802.11 conformant MAC and physical 
layer. 
Table 7.1 IEEE 802.11 Terminology 

232 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
Media Access Control All LANs consist of collections of devices that share the 
network’s transmission capacity. Some means of controlling access to the transmission 
medium is needed to provide an orderly and efficient use of that capacity. This 
is the function of a media access control (MAC) layer. The MAC layer receives data 
from a higher-layer protocol, typically the Logical Link Control (LLC) layer, in the 
form of a block of data known as the MAC service data unit (MSDU). In general, 
the MAC layer performs the following functions: 
■■ On transmission, assemble data into a frame, known as a MAC protocol data 
unit (MPDU) with address and error-detection fields. 
■■ On reception, disassemble frame, and perform address recognition and error 
detection. 
■■ Govern access to the LAN transmission medium. 
The exact format of the MPDU differs somewhat for the various MAC protocols 
in use. In general, all of the MPDUs have a format similar to that of Figure 7.4. 
The fields of this frame are as follows. 
■■ MAC Control: This field contains any protocol control information needed for 
the functioning of the MAC protocol. For example, a priority level could be 
indicated here. 
■■ Destination MAC Address: The destination physical address on the LAN for 
this MPDU. 
■■ Source MAC Address: The source physical address on the LAN for this MPDU. 
Figure 7.3 IEEE 802.11 Protocol Stack 
Logical Link 
Control 
Medium Access 
Control 
Physical 
Encoding/decoding of signals 
Bit transmission/reception 
Transmission medium 
Assemble data into frame 
Addressing 
Error detection 
Medium access 
Flow control 
Error control 
General IEEE 802 
functions 
Speci­c IEEE 802.11 
functions 
Frequency band de­nition 
Wireless signal encoding 
Reliable data delivery 
Wireless access control protocols 

7.3 / IE 802.11 Wireless Lan Overview 233 
■■ MAC Service Data Unit: The data from the next higher layer. 
■■ CRC: The cyclic redundancy check field; also known as the Frame Check 
Sequence (FCS) field. This is an error-detecting code, such as that which is 
used in other data-link control protocols. The CRC is calculated based on the 
bits in the entire MPDU. The sender calculates the CRC and adds it to the 
frame. The receiver performs the same calculation on the incoming MPDU 
and compares that calculation to the CRC field in that incoming MPDU. If 
the two values don’t match, then one or more bits have been altered in transit. 
The fields preceding the MSDU field are referred to as the MAC header, and 
the field following the MSDU field is referred to as the MAC trailer. The header 
and trailer contain control information that accompany the data field and that are 
used by the MAC protocol. 
Logical Link Control In most data-link control protocols, the data-link protocol 
entity is responsible not only for detecting errors using the CRC, but for recovering 
from those errors by retransmitting damaged frames. In the LAN protocol architecture, 
these two functions are split between the MAC and LLC layers. The MAC 
layer is responsible for detecting errors and discarding any frames that contain errors. 
The LLC layer optionally keeps track of which frames have been successfully 
received and retransmits unsuccessful frames. 
IEEE 802.11 Network Components and Architectural Model 
Figure 7.5 illustrates the model developed by the 802.11 working group. The smallest 
building block of a wireless LAN is a basic service set (BSS), which consists of 
wireless stations executing the same MAC protocol and competing for access to the 
same shared wireless medium. A BSS may be isolated, or it may connect to a backbone 
distribution system (DS) through an access point (AP). The AP functions as a 
bridge and a relay point. In a BSS, client stations do not communicate directly with 
one another. Rather, if one station in the BSS wants to communicate with another 
station in the same BSS, the MAC frame is first sent from the originating station to 
the AP and then from the AP to the destination station. Similarly, a MAC frame 
from a station in the BSS to a remote station is sent from the local station to the AP 
and then relayed by the AP over the DS on its way to the destination station. The 
BSS generally corresponds to what is referred to as a cell in the literature. The DS 
can be a switch, a wired network, or a wireless network. 
When all the stations in the BSS are mobile stations that communicate directly 
with one another (not using an AP), the BSS is called an independent BSS (IBSS). 
An IBSS is typically an ad hoc network. In an IBSS, the stations all communicate 
directly, and no AP is involved. 
Figure 7.4 General IEEE 802 MPDU Format 
MAC 
Control 
MAC header MAC trailer 
Destination 
MAC Address 
Source 
MAC Address MAC Service Data Unit (MSDU) CRC 

234 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
A simple configuration is shown in Figure 7.5, in which each station belongs 
to a single BSS; that is, each station is within wireless range only of other stations 
within the same BSS. It is also possible for two BSSs to overlap geographically, so 
that a single station could participate in more than one BSS. Furthermore, the association 
between a station and a BSS is dynamic. Stations may turn off, come within 
range, and go out of range. 
An extended service set (ESS) consists of two or more basic service sets 
interconnected 
by a distribution system. The extended service set appears as a single 
logical LAN to the logical link control (LLC) level. 
IEEE 802.11 Services 
IEEE 802.11 defines nine services that need to be provided by the wireless LAN to 
achieve functionality equivalent to that which is inherent to wired LANs. Table 7.2 
lists the services and indicates two ways of categorizing them. 
1. The service provider can be either the station or the DS. Station services are 
implemented in every 802.11 station, including AP stations. Distribution services 
are provided between BSSs; these services may be implemented in an AP 
or in another special-purpose device attached to the distribution system. 
2. Three of the services are used to control IEEE 802.11 LAN access and confidentiality. 
Six of the services are used to support delivery of MSDUs between 
stations. If the MSDU is too large to be transmitted in a single MPDU, it may 
be fragmented and transmitted in a series of MPDUs. 
Figure 7.5 IEEE 802.11 Extended Service Set 
STA 2 
STA 3 
STA4 
STA 1 
STA 6 STA 7 
STA 8 
AP 2 
AP 1 
Basic Service 
Set (BSS) 
Basic Service 
Set (BSS) 
Distribution System 

7.3 / IE 802.11 Wireless Lan Overview 235 
Following the IEEE 802.11 document, we next discuss the services in an order 
designed to clarify the operation of an IEEE 802.11 ESS network. MSDU delivery, 
which is the basic service, already has been mentioned. Services related to security 
are introduced in Section 7.4. 
Dist ribution of Mess ages Within a DS The two services involved with the distribution 
of messages within a DS are distribution and integration. Distribution is 
the primary service used by stations to exchange MPDUs when the MPDUs must 
traverse the DS to get from a station in one BSS to a station in another BSS. For 
example, suppose a frame is to be sent from station 2 (STA 2) to station 7 (STA 7) 
in Figure 7.5. The frame is sent from STA 2 to AP 1, which is the AP for this BSS. 
The AP gives the frame to the DS, which has the job of directing the frame to the 
AP associated with STA 7 in the target BSS. AP 2 receives the frame and forwards 
it to STA 7. How the message is transported through the DS is beyond the scope of 
the IEEE 802.11 standard. 
If the two stations that are communicating are within the same BSS, then the 
distribution service logically goes through the single AP of that BSS. 
The integration service enables transfer of data between a station on an IEEE 
802.11 LAN and a station on an integrated IEEE 802.x LAN. The term integrated 
refers to a wired LAN that is physically connected to the DS and whose stations 
may be logically connected to an IEEE 802.11 LAN via the integration service. The 
integration service takes care of any address translation and media conversion logic 
required for the exchange of data. 
Ass ociation-Related Services The primary purpose of the MAC layer is to 
transfer MSDUs between MAC entities; this purpose is fulfilled by the distribution 
service. For that service to function, it requires information about stations 
within the ESS that is provided by the association-related services. Before the 
distribution 
service 
can deliver data to or accept data from a station, that station 
must be associated. 
Before looking at the concept of association, we need 
Service Provider Used to support 
Association Distribution system MSDU delivery 
Authentication Station LAN access and security 
Deauthentication Station LAN access and security 
Disassociation Distribution system MSDU delivery 
Distribution Distribution system MSDU delivery 
Integration Distribution system MSDU delivery 
MSDU delivery Station MSDU delivery 
Privacy Station LAN access and security 
Reassociation Distribution system MSDU delivery 
Table 7.2 IEEE 802.11 Services 

236 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
to describe the concept of mobility. The standard defines three transition types, 
based on mobility: 
■■ No transition: A station of this type is either stationary or moves only within 
the direct communication range of the communicating stations of a single BSS. 
■■ BSS transition: This is defined as a station movement from one BSS to another 
BSS within the same ESS. In this case, delivery of data to the station requires that 
the addressing capability be able to recognize the new location of the station. 
■■ ESS transition: This is defined as a station movement from a BSS in one ESS 
to a BSS within another ESS. This case is supported only in the sense that 
the station can move. Maintenance of upper-layer connections supported by 
802.11 cannot be guaranteed. In fact, disruption of service is likely to occur. 
To deliver a message within a DS, the distribution service needs to know where 
the destination station is located. Specifically, the DS needs to know the identity of 
the AP to which the message should be delivered in order for that message to reach 
the destination station. To meet this requirement, a station must maintain an association 
with the AP within its current BSS. Three services relate to this requirement: 
■■ Association: Establishes an initial association between a station and an AP. 
Before a station can transmit or receive frames on a wireless LAN, its identity 
and address must be known. For this purpose, a station must establish an 
association 
with an AP within a particular BSS. The AP can then communicate 
this information to other APs within the ESS to facilitate routing and delivery 
of addressed frames. 
■■ Reassociation: Enables an established association to be transferred from one 
AP to another, allowing a mobile station to move from one BSS to another. 
■■ Disassociation: A notification from either a station or an AP that an existing 
association is terminated. A station should give this notification before leaving 
an ESS or shutting down. However, the MAC management facility protects 
itself against stations that disappear without notification. 
7.4 IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 
There are two characteristics of a wired LAN that are not inherent in a wireless LAN. 
1. In order to transmit over a wired LAN, a station must be physically connected 
to the LAN. On the other hand, with a wireless LAN, any station within radio 
range of the other devices on the LAN can transmit. In a sense, there is a form 
of authentication with a wired LAN in that it requires some positive and presumably 
observable action to connect a station to a wired LAN. 
2. Similarly, in order to receive a transmission from a station that is part of a 
wired LAN, the receiving station also must be attached to the wired LAN. 
On the other hand, with a wireless LAN, any station within radio range can 
receive. 
Thus, a wired LAN provides a degree of privacy, limiting reception of 
data to stations connected to the LAN. 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 237 
These differences between wired and wireless LANs suggest the increased 
need for robust security services and mechanisms for wireless LANs. The original 
802.11 specification included a set of security features for privacy and authentication 
that were quite weak. For privacy, 802.11 defined the Wired Equivalent 
Privacy (WEP) algorithm. The privacy portion of the 802.11 standard contained 
major weaknesses. Subsequent to the development of WEP, the 802.11i task 
group has developed a set of capabilities to address the WLAN security issues. 
In order to accelerate the introduction of strong security into WLANs, the Wi-Fi 
Alliance promulgated Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) as a Wi-Fi standard. WPA 
is a set of security mechanisms that eliminates most 802.11 security issues and 
was based on the current state of the 802.11i standard. The final form of the 
802.11i standard is referred to as Robust Security Network (RSN). The Wi-Fi 
Alliance certifies vendors in compliance with the full 802.11i specification under 
the WPA2 program. 
The RSN specification is quite complex, and occupies 145 pages of the 2012 
IEEE 802.11 standard. In this section, we provide an overview. 
IEEE 802.11i Services 
The 802.11i RSN security specification defines the following services. 
■■ Authentication: A protocol is used to define an exchange between a user and 
an AS that provides mutual authentication and generates temporary keys to 
be used between the client and the AP over the wireless link. 
■■ Access control:1 This function enforces the use of the authentication function, 
routes the messages properly, and facilitates key exchange. It can work with a 
variety of authentication protocols. 
■■ Privacy with message integrity: MAC-level data (e.g., an LLC PDU) are 
encrypted 
along with a message integrity code that ensures that the data have 
not been altered. 
Figure 7.6a indicates the security protocols used to support these services, 
while Figure 7.6b lists the cryptographic algorithms used for these services. 
IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation 
The operation of an IEEE 802.11i RSN can be broken down into five distinct phases 
of operation. The exact nature of the phases will depend on the configuration and 
the end points of the communication. Possibilities include (see Figure 7.5): 
1. Two wireless stations in the same BSS communicating via the access point 
(AP) for that BSS. 
2. Two wireless stations (STAs) in the same ad hoc IBSS communicating directly 
with each other. 
1In this context, we are discussing access control as a security function. This is a different function than 
media access control (MAC) as described in Section 7.3. Unfortunately, the literature and the standards 
use the term access control in both contexts. 

238 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
3. Two wireless stations in different BSSs communicating via their respective 
APs across a distribution system. 
4. A wireless station communicating with an end station on a wired network via 
its AP and the distribution system. 
IEEE 802.11i security is concerned only with secure communication between 
the STA and its AP. In case 1 in the preceding list, secure communication is assured 
if each STA establishes secure communications with the AP. Case 2 is similar, with 
the AP functionality residing in the STA. For case 3, security is not provided across 
the distribution system at the level of IEEE 802.11, but only within each BSS. Endto-
end security (if required) must be provided at a higher layer. Similarly, in case 4, 
security is only provided between the STA and its AP. 
Figure 7.6 Elements of IEEE 802.11i 
Access Control 
Algorithms Services Protocols Services 
IEEE 802.1 
Port-based 
Access Control 
Extensible 
Authentication 
Protocol (EAP) 
Authentication 
and Key 
Generation 
(a) Services and protocols 
Condentiality, Data 
Origin Authentication 
and Integrity and 
Replay Protection 
TKIP CCMP 
Robust Security Network (RSN) 
Condentiality 
TKIP 
(Michael 
MIC) 
CCM 
(AESCBCMAC) 
CCM 
(AESCTR) 
NIST 
Key 
Wrap 
HMACMD5 
HMACSHA-
1 
Integrity and 
Data Origin 
Authentication 
(b) Cryptographic algorithms 
Key 
Generation 
TKIP 
(RC4) 
Robust Security Network (RSN) 
HMACSHA-
1 
RFC 
1750 
CBC-MAC = Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code (MAC) 
CCM = Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining Message Authentication Code 
CCMP = Counter Mode with Cipher Block Chaining MAC Protocol 
TKIP = Temporal Key Integrity Protocol 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 239 
With these considerations in mind, Figure 7.7 depicts the five phases of operation 
for an RSN and maps them to the network components involved. One new 
component is the authentication server (AS). The rectangles indicate the exchange 
of sequences of MPDUs. The five phases are defined as follows. 
■■ Discovery: An AP uses messages called Beacons and Probe Responses to advertise 
its IEEE 802.11i security policy. The STA uses these to identify an AP 
for a WLAN with which it wishes to communicate. The STA associates with 
the AP, which it uses to select the cipher suite and authentication mechanism 
when the Beacons and Probe Responses present a choice. 
■■ Authentication: During this phase, the STA and AS prove their identities to 
each other. The AP blocks non-authentication traffic between the STA and AS 
until the authentication transaction is successful. The AP does not participate 
in the authentication transaction other than forwarding traffic between the 
STA and AS. 
■■ Key generation and distribution: The AP and the STA perform several operations 
that cause cryptographic keys to be generated and placed on the AP and 
the STA. Frames are exchanged between the AP and STA only. 
■■ Protected data transfer: Frames are exchanged between the STA and the end 
station through the AP. As denoted by the shading and the encryption module 
icon, secure data transfer occurs between the STA and the AP only; security is 
not provided end-to-end. 
Figure 7.7 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation 
Phase 1 - Discovery 
STA AP AS End Station 
Phase 5 - Connection Termination 
Phase 3 - Key Management 
Phase 4 - Protected Data Transfer 
Phase 2 - Authentication 

240 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
■■ Connection termination: The AP and STA exchange frames. During this phase, 
the secure connection is torn down and the connection is restored to the original 
state. 
Discovery Phase 
We now look in more detail at the RSN phases of operation, beginning with the 
discovery phase, which is illustrated in the upper portion of Figure 7.8. The purpose 
of this phase is for an STA and an AP to recognize each other, agree on a set of 
security capabilities, and establish an association for future communication using 
those security capabilities. 
Figure 7.8 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation: Capability Discovery, 
Authentication, and Association 
STA AP AS 
Station sends a request Probe request 
to join network AP sends possible 
security parameter 
(security capabilities set 
per the security policy) 
AP performs 
null authentication 
AP sends the associated 
security parameters 
Station sends a 
request to perform 
null authentication 
Station sends a request to 
associate with AP with 
security parameters 
Station sets selected 
security parameters 
Open system 
authentication request 
Probe response 
802.1X EAP request 
Access request 
(EAP request) 
802.1X EAP response 
Accept/EAP-success 
key material 
802.1X EAP success 
Association request 
Association response 
Open system 
authentication response 
802.1X-controlled port blocked 
802.1X-controlled port blocked 
Extensible Authentication Protocol Exchange 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 241 
Security Capabilities During this phase, the STA and AP decide on specific techniques 
in the following areas: 
■■ Confidentiality and MPDU integrity protocols for protecting unicast traffic 
(traffic only between this STA and AP) 
■■ Authentication method 
■■ Cryptography key management approach 
Confidentiality and integrity protocols for protecting multicast/broadcast traffic 
are dictated by the AP, since all STAs in a multicast group must use the same 
protocols and ciphers. The specification of a protocol, along with the chosen key 
length (if variable) is known as a cipher suite. The options for the confidentiality and 
integrity cipher suite are 
■■ WEP, with either a 40-bit or 104-bit key, which allows backward compatibility 
with older IEEE 802.11 implementations 
■■ TKIP 
■■ CCMP 
■■ Vendor-specific methods 
The other negotiable suite is the authentication and key management (AKM) 
suite, which defines (1) the means by which the AP and STA perform mutual authentication 
and (2) the means for deriving a root key from which other keys may 
be generated. The possible AKM suites are 
■■ IEEE 802.1X 
■■ Pre-shared key (no explicit authentication takes place and mutual authentication 
is implied if the STA and AP share a unique secret key) 
■■ Vendor-specific methods 
MPDU Exchange The discovery phase consists of three exchanges. 
■■ Network and security capability discovery: During this exchange, STAs discover 
the existence of a network with which to communicate. The AP either 
periodically broadcasts its security capabilities (not shown in figure), indicated 
by RSN IE (Robust Security Network Information Element), in a specific 
channel through the Beacon frame; or responds to a station’s Probe Request 
through a Probe Response frame. A wireless station may discover available 
access points and corresponding security capabilities by either passively monitoring 
the Beacon frames or actively probing every channel. 
■■ Open system authentication: The purpose of this frame sequence, which provides 
no security, is simply to maintain backward compatibility with the IEEE 
802.11 state machine, as implemented in existing IEEE 802.11 hardware. In 
essence, the two devices (STA and AP) simply exchange identifiers. 
■■ Association: The purpose of this stage is to agree on a set of security capabilities 
to be used. The STA then sends an Association Request frame to 
the AP. In this frame, the STA specifies one set of matching capabilities 

242 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
(one authentication and key management suite, one pairwise cipher suite, 
and one group-key cipher suite) from among those advertised by the AP. 
If there is no match in capabilities between the AP and the STA, the AP 
refuses the Association Request. The STA blocks it too, in case it has associated 
with a rogue AP or someone is inserting frames illicitly on its channel. 
As shown in Figure 7.8, the IEEE 802.1X controlled ports are blocked, and 
no user traffic goes beyond the AP. The concept of blocked ports is explained 
subsequently. 
Authentication Phase 
As was mentioned, the authentication phase enables mutual authentication between 
an STA and an authentication server (AS) located in the DS. Authentication is 
designed to allow only authorized stations to use the network and to provide the 
STA with assurance that it is communicating with a legitimate network. 
IE 802.1X Access Control App roach IEEE 802.11i makes use of another standard 
that was designed to provide access control functions for LANs. The standard 
is IEEE 802.1X, Port-Based Network Access Control. The authentication protocol 
that is used, the Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP), is defined in the 
IEEE 802.1X standard. IEEE 802.1X uses the terms supplicant, authenticator, and 
authentication server (AS). In the context of an 802.11 WLAN, the first two terms 
correspond to the wireless station and the AP. The AS is typically a separate device 
on the wired side of the network (i.e., accessible over the DS) but could also reside 
directly on the authenticator. 
Before a supplicant is authenticated by the AS using an authentication protocol, 
the authenticator only passes control or authentication messages between the 
supplicant and the AS; the 802.1X control channel is unblocked, but the 802.11 data 
channel is blocked. Once a supplicant is authenticated and keys are provided, the 
authenticator can forward data from the supplicant, subject to predefined access 
control limitations for the supplicant to the network. Under these circumstances, 
the data channel is unblocked. 
As indicated in Figure 5.5, 802.1X uses the concepts of controlled and uncontrolled 
ports. Ports are logical entities defined within the authenticator and refer to 
physical network connections. For a WLAN, the authenticator (the AP) may have 
only two physical ports: one connecting to the DS and one for wireless communication 
within its BSS. Each logical port is mapped to one of these two physical ports. 
An uncontrolled port allows the exchange of PDUs between the supplicant and the 
other AS, regardless of the authentication state of the supplicant. A controlled port 
allows the exchange of PDUs between a supplicant and other systems on the LAN 
only if the current state of the supplicant authorizes such an exchange. IEEE 802.1X 
is covered in more detail in Chapter 5. 
The 802.1X framework, with an upper-layer authentication protocol, fits 
nicely with a BSS architecture that includes a number of wireless stations and an 
AP. However, for an IBSS, there is no AP. For an IBSS, 802.11i provides a more 
complex solution that, in essence, involves pairwise authentication between stations 
on the IBSS. 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 243 
MPDU Exchange The lower part of Figure 7.8 shows the MPDU exchange dictated 
by IEEE 802.11 for the authentication phase. We can think of authentication 
phase as consisting of the following three phases. 
■■ Connect to AS: The STA sends a request to its AP (the one with which it has 
an association) for connection to the AS. The AP acknowledges this request 
and sends an access request to the AS. 
■■ EAP exchange: This exchange authenticates the STA and AS to each other. 
A number of alternative exchanges are possible, as explained subsequently. 
■■ Secure key delivery: Once authentication is established, the AS generates a 
master session key (MSK), also known as the Authentication, Authorization, 
and Accounting (AAA) key and sends it to the STA. As explained subsequently, 
all the cryptographic keys needed by the STA for secure communication 
with its AP are generated from this MSK. IEEE 802.11i does not prescribe 
a method for secure delivery of the MSK but relies on EAP for this. Whatever 
method is used, it involves the transmission of an MPDU containing an encrypted 
MSK from the AS, via the AP, to the AS. 
EA P Exchange As mentioned, there are a number of possible EAP exchanges that 
can be used during the authentication phase. Typically, the message flow between 
STA and AP employs the EAP over LAN (EAPOL) protocol, and the message 
flow between the AP and AS uses the Remote Authentication Dial In User Service 
(RADIUS) protocol, although other options are available for both STA-to-AP and 
AP-to-AS exchanges. [FRAN07] provides the following summary of the authentication 
exchange using EAPOL and RADIUS. 
1. The EAP exchange begins with the AP issuing an EAP-Request/Identity 
frame to the STA. 
2. The STA replies with an EAP-Response/Identity frame, which the AP receives 
over the uncontrolled port. The packet is then encapsulated in RADIUS over 
EAP and passed on to the RADIUS server as a RADIUS-Access-Request 
packet. 
3. The AAA server replies with a RADIUS-Access-Challenge packet, which is 
passed on to the STA as an EAP-Request. This request is of the appropriate 
authentication type and contains relevant challenge information. 
4. The STA formulates an EAP-Response message and sends it to the AS. The 
response is translated by the AP into a Radius-Access-Request with the response 
to the challenge as a data field. Steps 3 and 4 may be repeated multiple 
times, depending on the EAP method in use. For TLS tunneling methods, it is 
common for authentication to require 10 to 20 round trips. 
5. The AAA server grants access with a Radius-Access-Accept packet. The AP 
issues an EAP-Success frame. (Some protocols require confirmation of the 
EAP success inside the TLS tunnel for authenticity validation.) The controlled 
port is authorized, and the user may begin to access the network. 
Note from Figure 7.8 that the AP controlled port is still blocked to general 
user traffic. Although the authentication is successful, the ports remain blocked 

244 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
until the temporal keys are installed in the STA and AP, which occurs during the 
4-Way Handshake. 
Key Management Phase 
During the key management phase, a variety of cryptographic keys are generated 
and distributed to STAs. There are two types of keys: pairwise keys used for communication 
between an STA and an AP and group keys used for multicast communication. 
Figure 7.9, based on [FRAN07], shows the two key hierarchies, and 
Table 7.3 defines the individual keys. 
Figure 7.9 IEEE 802.11i Key Hierarchies 
Out-of-band path EAP method path 
Pre-shared key 
EAPOL key conrmation key EAPOL key encryption key Temporal key 
PSK 
256 bits 
384 bits (CCMP) 
512 bits (TKIP) 
128 bits (CCMP) 
256 bits (TKIP) 
40 bits, 104 bits (WEP) 
128 bits (CCMP) 
256 bits (TKIP) 
256 bits 
128 bits 
No modication 
Legend 
Possible truncation 
PRF (pseudo random 
function) using 
HMAC-SHA-1 
128 bits 
User-dened 
cryptoid 
EAP 
authentication 
Following EAP authentication 
or PSK 
During 4-way handshake 
These keys are 
components of the PTK 
 256 bits 
PMK 
KCK 
PTK 
KEK TK 
AAAK or MSK 
Pairwise master key 
(b) Group key hierarchy 
(a) Pairwise key hierarchy
AAA key 
Pairwise transient key 
256 bits Changes periodically 
or if compromised 
Changes based on 
policy (dissociation, 
deauthentication) 
GMK (generated by AS) 
GTK 
Group master key 
Group temporal key 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 245 
Abbreviation Name Description / Purpose Size (bits) Type 
AAA Key Authentication, 
Accounting, and 
Authorization Key 
Used to derive the PMK. 
Used with the IEEE 
802.1X authentication 
and key management 
approach. Same as 
MMSK. 
Ú 256 Key generation key, 
root key 
PSK Pre-shared Key Becomes the PMK 
in pre-shared key 
environments. 
256 Key generation key, 
root key 
PMK Pairwise Master Key Used with other inputs to 
derive the PTK. 
256 Key generation key 
GMK Group Master Key Used with other inputs to 
derive the GTK. 
128 Key generation key 
PTK Pair-wise Transient 
Key 
Derived from the PMK. 
Comprises the EAPOLKCK, 
EAPOL-KEK, and 
TK and (for TKIP) the 
MIC key. 
512 (TKIP) 
384 (CCMP) 
Composite key 
TK Temporal Key Used with TKIP or 
CCMP to provide 
confidentiality and 
integrity protection for 
unicast user traffic. 
256 (TKIP) 
128 (CCMP) 
Traffic key 
GTK Group Temporal Key Derived from the 
GMK. Used to provide 
confidentiality and 
integrity protection for 
multicast/broadcast user 
traffic. 
256 (TKIP) 
128 (CCMP) 
40,104 (WEP) 
Traffic key 
MIC Key Message Integrity 
Code Key 
Used by TKIP’s Michael 
MIC to provide integrity 
protection of messages. 
64 Message integrity key 
EAPOL-KCK EAPOL-Key 
Confirmation Key 
Used to provide integrity 
protection for key 
material distributed 
during the 4-Way 
Handshake. 
128 Message integrity key 
EAPOL-KEK EAPOL-Key 
Encryption Key 
Used to ensure the 
confidentiality of the 
GTK and other key 
material in the 4-Way 
Handshake. 
128 Traffic key / key 
encryption key 
WEP Key Wired Equivalent 
Privacy Key 
Used with WEP. 40,104 Traffic key 
Table 7.3 IEEE 802.11i Keys for Data Confidentiality and Integrity Protocols 

246 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
Pairwise Keys Pairwise keys are used for communication between a pair of devices, 
typically between an STA and an AP. These keys form a hierarchy beginning with 
a master key from which other keys are derived dynamically and used for a limited 
period of time. 
At the top level of the hierarchy are two possibilities. A pre-shared key (PSK) 
is a secret key shared by the AP and a STA and installed in some fashion outside 
the scope of IEEE 802.11i. The other alternative is the master session key (MSK), 
also known as the AAAK, which is generated using the IEEE 802.1X protocol during 
the authentication phase, as described previously. The actual method of key 
generation depends on the details of the authentication protocol used. In either case 
(PSK or MSK), there is a unique key shared by the AP with each STA with which 
it communicates. All the other keys derived from this master key are also unique 
between an AP and an STA. Thus, each STA, at any time, has one set of keys, as 
depicted in the hierarchy of Figure 7.9a, while the AP has one set of such keys for 
each of its STAs. 
The pairwise master key (PMK) is derived from the master key. If a PSK is 
used, then the PSK is used as the PMK; if a MSK is used, then the PMK is derived 
from the MSK by truncation (if necessary). By the end of the authentication phase, 
marked by the 802.1X EAP Success message (Figure 7.8), both the AP and the STA 
have a copy of their shared PMK. 
The PMK is used to generate the pairwise transient key (PTK), which in fact 
consists of three keys to be used for communication between an STA and AP after 
they have been mutually authenticated. To derive the PTK, the HMAC-SHA-1 
function is applied to the PMK, the MAC addresses of the STA and AP, and nonces 
generated when needed. Using the STA and AP addresses in the generation of the 
PTK provides protection against session hijacking and impersonation; using nonces 
provides additional random keying material. 
The three parts of the PTK are as follows. 
■■ EAP Over LAN (EAPOL) Key Confirmation Key (EAPOL-KCK): Supports 
the integrity and data origin authenticity of STA-to-AP control frames during 
operational setup of an RSN. It also performs an access control function: 
proof-of-possession of the PMK. An entity that possesses the PMK is authorized 
to use the link. 
■■ EAPOL Key Encryption Key (EAPOL-KEK): Protects the confidentiality of 
keys and other data during some RSN association procedures. 
■■ Temporal Key (TK): Provides the actual protection for user traffic. 
Group Keys Group keys are used for multicast communication in which one STA 
sends MPDU’s to multiple STAs. At the top level of the group key hierarchy is 
the group master key (GMK). The GMK is a key-generating key used with other 
inputs to derive the group temporal key (GTK). Unlike the PTK, which is generated 
using material from both AP and STA, the GTK is generated by the AP and 
transmitted to its associated STAs. Exactly how this GTK is generated is undefined. 
IEEE 802.11i, however, requires that its value is computationally indistinguishable 
from random. The GTK is distributed securely using the pairwise keys 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 247 
that are already 
established. The GTK is changed every time a device leaves the 
network. 
Pairwise Key Dist ribution The upper part of Figure 7.10 shows the MPDU 
exchange 
for distributing pairwise keys. This exchange is known as the 4-way handshake. 
The STA and AP use this handshake to confirm the existence of the 
Figure 7.10 IEEE 802.11i Phases of Operation: 4-Way Handshake and Group Key Handshake 
STA AP
Message 1 delivers a nonce to 
the STA so that it can generate 
the PTK. 
Message 1 delivers a new GTK to 
the STA. The GTK is encrypted 
before it is sent and the entire 
message is integrity protected. 
The AP installs the GTK. 
Message 3 demonstrates to 
the STA that the authenticator 
is alive, ensures that the PTK is 
fresh (new) and that there is no 
man-in-the-middle. 
Message 2 delivers another nonce to the 
AP so that it can also generate the 
PTK. It demonstrates to the AP that 
the STA is alive, ensures that the 
PTK is fresh (new) and that there is no 
man-in-the-middle. 
The STA decrypts the GTK 
and installs it for use. 
Message 2 is delivered to the 
AP. This frame serves only as 
an acknowledgment to the AP. 
Message 4 serves as an acknowledgment to 
Message 3. It serves no cryptographic 
function. This message also ensures the 
reliable start of the group key handshake. 
Message 2 
EAPOL-key (Snonce, 
Unicast, MIC) 
Message 1 
EAPOL-key (Anonce, Unicast) 
Message 1 
EAPOL-key (GTK, MIC) 
Message 4 
EAPOL-key (Unicast, MIC) 
Message 2 
EAPOL-key (MIC) 
Message 3 
EAPOL-key (Install PTK, 
Unicast, MIC) 
AP’s 802.1X-controlled port blocked 
AP’s 802.1X-controlled port 
unblocked for unicast trac 

248 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
PMK, verify the selection of the cipher suite, and derive a fresh PTK for the following 
data session. The four parts of the exchange are as follows. 
■■ APSSTA: Message includes the MAC address of the AP and a nonce 
(Anonce). 
■■ STASAP: The STA generates its own nonce (Snonce) and uses both nonces 
and both MAC addresses, plus the PMK, to generate a PTK. The STA then 
sends a message containing its MAC address and Snonce, enabling the AP to 
generate the same PTK. This message includes a message integrity code 
(MIC)2 using HMAC-MD5 or HMAC-SHA-1-128. The key used with the MIC 
is KCK. 
■■ APSSTA: The AP is now able to generate the PTK. The AP then sends a 
message to the STA, containing the same information as in the first message, 
but this time including a MIC. 
■■ STASAP: This is merely an acknowledgment message, again protected by 
a MIC. 
Group Key Dist ribution For group key distribution, the AP generates a GTK and 
distributes it to each STA in a multicast group. The two-message exchange with 
each STA consists of the following: 
■■ APSSTA: This message includes the GTK, encrypted either with RC4 or 
with AES. The key used for encryption is KEK. A MIC value is appended. 
 
■■ STASAP: The STA acknowledges receipt of the GTK. This message includes 
a MIC value. 
Protected Data Transfer Phase 
IEEE 802.11i defines two schemes for protecting data transmitted in 802.11 MPDUs: 
the Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP), and the Counter Mode-CBC MAC 
Protocol (CCMP). 
TKI P TKIP is designed to require only software changes to devices that are implemented 
with the older wireless LAN security approach called Wired Equivalent 
Privacy (WEP). TKIP provides two services: 
■■ Message integrity: TKIP adds a message integrity code (MIC) to the 802.11 
MAC frame after the data field. The MIC is generated by an algorithm, called 
Michael, that computes a 64-bit value using as input the source and destination 
MAC address values and the Data field, plus key material. 
■■ Data confidentiality: Data confidentiality is provided by encrypting the 
MPDU plus MIC value using RC4. 
2 While MAC is commonly used in cryptography to refer to a Message Authentication Code, the term 
MIC is used instead in connection with 802.11i because MAC has another standard meaning, Media 
Access Control, in networking. 

7.4 / IE 802.11i Wireless Lan Security 249 
The 256-bit TK (Figure 7.9) is employed as follows. Two 64-bit keys are used 
with the Michael message digest algorithm to produce a message integrity code. 
One key is used to protect STA-to-AP messages, and the other key is used to protect 
AP-to-STA messages. The remaining 128 bits are truncated to generate the 
RC4 key used to encrypt the transmitted data. 
For additional protection, a monotonically increasing TKIP sequence counter 
(TSC) is assigned to each frame. The TSC serves two purposes. First, the 
TSC is included with each MPDU and is protected by the MIC to protect against 
replay 
attacks. Second, the TSC is combined with the session TK to produce a 
dynamic 
encryption 
key that changes with each transmitted MPDU, thus making 
cryptanalysis 
more difficult. 
CCM P CCMP is intended for newer IEEE 802.11 devices that are equipped with 
the hardware to support this scheme. As with TKIP, CCMP provides two services: 
■■ Message integrity: CCMP uses the cipher block chaining message authentication 
code (CBC-MAC), described in Chapter 3. 
■■ Data confidentiality: CCMP uses the CTR block cipher mode of operation 
with AES for encryption. CTR is described in Chapter 2. 
The same 128-bit AES key is used for both integrity and confidentiality. The 
scheme uses a 48-bit packet number to construct a nonce to prevent replay attacks. 
The IEEE 802.11i Pseudorandom Function 
At a number of places in the IEEE 802.11i scheme, a pseudorandom function (PRF) is 
used. For example, it is used to generate nonces, to expand pairwise keys, and to generate 
the GTK. Best security practice dictates that different pseudorandom number 
streams be used for these different purposes. However, for implementation efficiency, 
we would like to rely on a single pseudorandom number generator function. 
The PRF is built on the use of HMAC-SHA-1 to generate a pseudorandom 
bit stream. Recall that HMAC-SHA-1 takes a message (block of data) and a key of 
length at least 160 bits and produces a 160-bit hash value. SHA-1 has the property 
that the change of a single bit of the input produces a new hash value with no apparent 
connection to the preceding hash value. This property is the basis for pseudorandom 
number generation. 
The IEEE 802.11i PRF takes four parameters as input and produces the desired 
number of random bits. The function is of the form PRF(K, A, B, Len), where 
K = a secret key 
A = a text string specific to the application (e.g., nonce generation or pairwise 
key expansion) 
B = some data specific to each case 
Len = desired number of pseudorandom bits 
For example, for the pairwise transient key for CCMP: 
PTK = PRF (PMK, “Pairwise key expansion”, min (APAddr, 
STA-Addr) || max (AP-Addr, STA-Addr) || min 
(Anonce, Snonce) || max (Anonce, Snonce), 384) 

250 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
So, in this case, the parameters are 
K = PMK 
A = the text string “Pairwise key expansion” 
B = a sequence of bytes formed by concatenating the two MAC addresses 
and the two nonces 
Len = 384 bits 
Similarly, a nonce is generated by 
Nonce = PRF (Random Number, “InitCounter”, MAC || Time, 256) 
where Time is a measure of the network time known to the nonce generator. 
The group temporal key is generated by 
GTK = PRF (GMK, “Group key expansion”, MAC || Gnonce, 256) 
Figure 7.11 illustrates the function PRF(K, A, B, Len). The parameter K 
serves as the key input to HMAC. The message input consists of four items concatenated 
together: the parameter A, a byte with value 0, the parameter B, and a counter 
i. The counter is initialized to 0. The HMAC algorithm is run once, producing 
a 160-bit hash value. If more bits are required, HMAC is run again with the same 
inputs, except that i is incremented each time until the necessary number of bits is 
generated. We can express the logic as 
PRF (K, A, B, Len) 
R S null string 
for i S 0 to ((Len + 159)/160 − 1) do 
R S R || HMAC-SHA-1 (K, A || 0 || B || i) 
Return Truncate-to-Len (R, Len) 
Figure 7.11 IEEE 802.11i Pseudorandom Function 
HMAC-SHA-1 
| | 
K 
A 0 B i 
R = HMAC-SHA-1(K, A || 0 || B || i) 
+ 1 

