7.1 / Wireless Security 223 
This chapter begins with a general overview of wireless security issues. We then focus 
on the relatively new area of mobile device security, examining threats and countermeasures 
for mobile devices used in the enterprise. Then, we look at the IEEE 802.11i 
standard for wireless LAN security. This standard is part of IEEE 802.11, also referred 
to as Wi-Fi. We begin the discussion with an overview of IEEE 802.11, and then we 
look in some detail at IEEE 802.11i. 
7.1 Wireless Security 
Wireless networks, and the wireless devices that use them, introduce a host of security 
problems over and above those found in wired networks. Some of the key factors 
contributing to the higher security risk of wireless networks compared to wired 
networks include the following [MA10]: 
■■ Channel: Wireless networking typically involves broadcast communications, 
which is far more susceptible to eavesdropping and jamming than wired 
networks. Wireless networks are also more vulnerable to active attacks that 
exploit vulnerabilities in communications protocols. 
■■ Mobility: Wireless devices are, in principal and usually in practice, far more 
portable and mobile than wired devices. This mobility results in a number of 
risks, described subsequently. 
■■ Resources: Some wireless devices, such as smartphones and tablets, have 
sophisticated operating systems but limited memory and processing resources 
with which to counter threats, including denial of service and malware. 
■■ Accessibility: Some wireless devices, such as sensors and robots, may be left 
unattended in remote and/or hostile locations. This greatly increases their 
vulnerability 
to physical attacks. 
Learning Objectives 
After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of security threats and countermeasures for wireless 
networks. 
◆ ◆ Understand the unique security threats posed by the use of mobile devices 
with enterprise networks. 
◆ ◆ Describe the principal elements in a mobile device security strategy. 
◆ ◆ Understand the essential elements of the IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN standard. 
◆ ◆ Summarize the various components of the IEEE 802.11i wireless LAN security 
architecture. 

224 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
In simple terms, the wireless environment consists of three components that 
provide point of attack (Figure 7.1). The wireless client can be a cell phone, a 
Wi-
Fi–enabled laptop or tablet, a wireless sensor, a Bluetooth device, and so on. 
The wireless 
access point provides a connection to the network or service. Examples 
of access points are cell towers, Wi-Fi hotspots, and wireless access points to wired 
local or wide area networks. The transmission medium, which carries the radio 
waves for data transfer, is also a source of vulnerability. 
Wireless Network Threats 
[CHOI08] lists the following security threats to wireless networks: 
■■ Accidental association: Company wireless LANs or wireless access points to 
wired LANs in close proximity (e.g., in the same or neighboring buildings) 
may create overlapping transmission ranges. A user intending to connect to 
one LAN may unintentionally lock on to a wireless access point from a neighboring 
network. Although the security breach is accidental, it nevertheless 
exposes 
resources of one LAN to the accidental user. 
■■ Malicious association: In this situation, a wireless device is configured to 
appear 
to be a legitimate access point, enabling the operator to steal passwords 
from legitimate users and then penetrate a wired network through a 
legitimate wireless access point. 
■■ Ad hoc networks: These are peer-to-peer networks between wireless computers 
with no access point between them. Such networks can pose a security 
threat due to a lack of a central point of control. 
■■ Nontraditional networks: Nontraditional networks and links, such as personal 
network Bluetooth devices, barcode readers, and handheld PDAs, pose a security 
risk in terms of both eavesdropping and spoofing. 
■■ Identity theft (MAC spoofing): This occurs when an attacker is able to eavesdrop 
on network traffic and identify the MAC address of a computer with 
network privileges. 
■■ Man-in-the middle attacks: This type of attack is described in Chapter 3 in 
the context of the Diffie–Hellman key exchange protocol. In a broader sense, 
this attack involves persuading a user and an access point to believe that they 
are talking to each other when in fact the communication is going through an 
intermediate attacking device. Wireless networks are particularly vulnerable 
to such attacks. 
Figure 7.1 Wireless Networking Components 
Endpoint Wireless medium Access point 

7.1 / Wireless Security 225 
■■ Denial of service (DoS): This type of attack is discussed in detail in Chapter 10. 
In the context of a wireless network, a DoS attack occurs when an attacker 
continually bombards a wireless access point or some other accessible wireless 
port with various protocol messages designed to consume system resources. 
The wireless environment lends itself to this type of attack, because it is so 
easy for the attacker to direct multiple wireless messages at the target. 
■■ Network injection: A network injection attack targets wireless access points 
that are exposed to nonfiltered network traffic, such as routing protocol messages 
or network management messages. An example of such an attack is 
one in which bogus reconfiguration commands are used to affect routers and 
switches to degrade network performance. 
Wireless Security Measures 
Following [CHOI08], we can group wireless security measures into those dealing 
with wireless transmissions, wireless access points, and wireless networks (consisting 
of wireless routers and endpoints). 
Securing Wireless Transmiss ions The principal threats to wireless transmission 
are eavesdropping, altering or inserting messages, and disruption. To deal with 
eavesdropping, two types of countermeasures are appropriate: 
■■ Signal-hiding techniques: Organizations can take a number of measures to 
make it more difficult for an attacker to locate their wireless access points, 
including turning off service set identifier (SSID) broadcasting by wireless 
access 
points; assigning cryptic names to SSIDs; reducing signal strength to the 
lowest level that still provides requisite coverage; and locating wireless access 
points in the interior of the building, away from windows and exterior walls. 
Greater security can be achieved by the use of directional antennas and of 
signal-shielding techniques. 
■■ Encryption: Encryption of all wireless transmission is effective against eavesdropping 
to the extent that the encryption keys are secured. 
The use of encryption and authentication protocols is the standard method of 
countering attempts to alter or insert transmissions. 
The methods discussed in Chapter 10 for dealing with DoS apply to wireless 
transmissions. Organizations can also reduce the risk of unintentional DoS attacks. 
Site surveys can detect the existence of other devices using the same frequency 
range, to help determine where to locate wireless access points. Signal strengths can 
be adjusted and shielding used in an attempt to isolate a wireless environment from 
competing nearby transmissions. 
Securing Wireless Access Points The main threat involving wireless access 
points is unauthorized access to the network. The principal approach for preventing 
such access is the IEEE 802.1X standard for port-based network access control. The 
standard provides an authentication mechanism for devices wishing to attach to a 
LAN or wireless network. The use of 802.1X can prevent rogue access points and 
other unauthorized devices from becoming insecure backdoors. 
Section 5.3 provides an introduction to 802.1X. 

226 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
Securing Wireless Netw orks [CHOI08] recommends the following techniques 
for wireless network security: 
1. Use encryption. Wireless routers are typically equipped with built-in encryption 
mechanisms for router-to-router traffic. 
2. Use antivirus and antispyware software, and a firewall. These facilities should 
be enabled on all wireless network endpoints. 
3. Turn off identifier broadcasting. Wireless routers are typically configured to 
broadcast an identifying signal so that any device within range can learn of 
the router’s existence. If a network is configured so that authorized devices 
know the identity of routers, this capability can be disabled, so as to thwart 
attackers. 
4. Change the identifier on your router from the default. Again, this measure 
thwarts attackers who will attempt to gain access to a wireless network using 
default router identifiers. 
5. Change your router’s pre-set password for administration. This is another prudent 
step. 
6. Allow only specific computers to access your wireless network. A router can 
be configured to only communicate with approved MAC addresses. Of course, 
MAC addresses can be spoofed, so this is just one element of a security strategy. 
7.2 Mobile Device Security 
Prior to the widespread use of smartphones, the dominant paradigm for computer 
and network security in organizations was as follows. Corporate IT was tightly controlled. 
User devices were typically limited to Windows PCs. Business applications 
were controlled by IT and either run locally on endpoints or on physical servers 
in data centers. Network security was based upon clearly defined perimeters that 
separated trusted internal networks from the untrusted Internet. Today, there have 
been massive changes in each of these assumptions. An organization’s networks 
must accommodate the following: 
■■ Growing use of new devices: Organizations are experiencing significant growth 
in employee use of mobile devices. In many cases, employees are allowed to 
use a combination of endpoint devices as part of their day-to-day activities. 
■■ Cloud-based applications: Applications no longer run solely on physical 
servers in corporate data centers. Quite the opposite, applications can run 
anywhere—
on traditional physical servers, on mobile virtual servers, or in the 
cloud. Additionally, end users can now take advantage of a wide variety of 
cloud-based applications and IT services for personal and professional use. 
Facebook can be used for an employee’s personal profiles or as a component 
of a corporate marketing campaign. Employees depend upon Skype to speak 
with friends abroad or for legitimate business video conferencing. Dropbox 
and Box can be used to distribute documents between corporate and personal 
devices for mobility and user productivity. 

7.2 / Mobile Device Security 227 
■■ De-perimeterization: Given new device proliferation, application mobility, 
and cloud-based consumer and corporate services, the notion of a static network 
perimeter is all but gone. Now there are a multitude of network perimeters 
around devices, applications, users, and data. These perimeters have also 
become quite dynamic as they must adapt to various environmental conditions 
such as user role, device type, server virtualization mobility, network location, 
and time-of-day. 
■■ External business requirements: The enterprise must also provide guests, 
third-party contractors, and business partners network access using various 
devices from a multitude of locations. 
The central element in all of these changes is the mobile computing device. 
Mobile devices have become an essential element for organizations as part of the 
overall network infrastructure. Mobile devices such as smartphones, tablets, and 
memory sticks provide increased convenience for individuals as well as the potential 
for increased productivity in the workplace. Because of their widespread use 
and unique characteristics, security for mobile devices is a pressing and complex 
issue. In essence, an organization needs to implement a security policy through a 
combination of security features built into the mobile devices and additional security 
controls provided by network components that regulate the use of the mobile 
devices. 
Security Threats 
Mobile devices need additional, specialized protection measures beyond those 
implemented 
for other client devices, such as desktop and laptop devices that are 
used only within the organization’s facilities and on the organization’s networks. 
SP 800-14 (Guidelines for Managing and Securing Mobile Devices in the Enterprise, 
July 2012) lists seven major security concerns for mobile devices. We examine each 
of these in turn. 
Lack of Physical Security Controls Mobile devices are typically under the complete 
control of the user, and are used and kept in a variety of locations outside the 
organization’s control, including off premises. Even if a device is required to remain 
on premises, the user may move the device within the organization between secure 
and nonsecured locations. Thus, theft and tampering are realistic threats. 
The security policy for mobile devices must be based on the assumption that 
any mobile device may be stolen or at least accessed by a malicious party. The threat 
is twofold: A malicious party may attempt to recover sensitive data from the device 
itself, or may use the device to gain access to the organization’s resources. 
Use of Untrust ed Mobile Devices In addition to company-issued and companycontrolled 
mobile devices, virtually all employees will have personal smartphones 
and/or tablets. The organization must assume that these devices are not trustworthy. 
That is, the devices may not employ encryption and either the user or a third party 
may have installed a bypass to the built-in restrictions on security, operating system 
use, and so on. 

228 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
Use of Untrust ed Netw orks If a mobile device is used on premises, it can connect 
to organization resources over the organization’s own in-house wireless networks. 
However, for off-premises use, the user will typically access organizational resources 
via Wi-Fi or cellular access to the Internet and from the Internet to the organization. 
Thus, traffic that includes an off-premises segment is potentially susceptible to 
eavesdropping or man-in-the-middle types of attacks. Thus, the security policy must 
be based on the assumption that the networks between the mobile device 
and the 
organization are not trustworthy. 
Use of App lications Created by Unknown Parties By design, it is easy to find 
and install third-party applications on mobile devices. This poses the obvious risk of 
installing malicious software. An organization has several options for dealing with 
this threat, as described subsequently. 
Interaction with Other Syst ems A common feature found on smartphones and 
tablets is the ability to automatically synchronize data, apps, contacts, photos, and 
so on with other computing devices and with cloud-based storage. Unless an organization 
has control of all the devices involved in synchronization, there is considerable 
risk of the organization’s data being stored in an unsecured location, plus the 
risk of the introduction of malware. 
Use of Untrust ed Content Mobile devices may access and use content that other 
computing devices do not encounter. An example is the Quick Response (QR) 
code, which is a two-dimensional barcode. QR codes are designed to be captured 
by a mobile device camera and used by the mobile device. The QR code translates 
to a URL, so that a malicious QR code could direct the mobile device to malicious 
Web sites. 
Use of Location Services The GPS capability on mobile devices can be used to 
maintain a knowledge of the physical location of the device. While this feature 
might be useful to an organization as part of a presence service, it creates security 
risks. An attacker can use the location information to determine where the device 
and user are located, which may be of use to the attacker. 
Mobile Device Security Strategy 
With the threats listed in the preceding discussion in mind, we outline the principal 
elements of a mobile device security strategy. They fall into three categories: device 
security, client/server traffic security, and barrier security (Figure 7.2). 
Device Security A number of organizations will supply mobile devices for 
employee 
use and preconfigure those devices to conform to the enterprise security 
policy. However, many organizations will find it convenient or even necessary 
to adopt a bring-your-own-device (BYOD) policy that allows the personal mobile 
devices of employees to have access to corporate resources. IT managers should be 
able to inspect each device before allowing network access. IT will want to establish 
configuration guidelines for operating systems and applications. For example, 
“rooted” or “jail-broken” devices are not permitted on the network, and mobile 

7.2 / Mobile Device Security 229 
devices cannot store corporate contacts on local storage. Whether a device is owned 
by the organization or BYOD, the organization should configure the device with 
security controls, including the following: 
■■ Enable auto-lock, which causes the device to lock if it has not been used for a 
given amount of time, requiring the user to re-enter a four-digit PIN or a password 
to re-activate the device. 
■■ Enable password or PIN protection. The PIN or password is needed to unlock 
the device. In addition, it can be configured so that e-mail and other data on 
the device are encrypted using the PIN or password and can only be retrieved 
with the PIN or password. 
■■ Avoid using auto-complete features that remember user names or passwords. 
■■ Enable remote wipe. 
■■ Ensure that SSL protection is enabled, if available. 
■■ Make sure that software, including operating systems and applications, is up 
to date. 
■■ Install antivirus software as it becomes available. 
Figure 7.2 Mobile Device Security Elements 
Firewall 
Firewall limits 
scope of data 
and application 
access 
Authentication 
and access control 
protocols used to 
verify device and user 
and establish limits 
on access 
Mobile device is 
congured with 
security mechanisms and 
parameters to conform to 
organization security policy 
Trac is encrypted; 
uses SSL or IPsec 
VPN tunnel 
Authentication/ 
access control 
server 
Mobile device 
con
guration 
server 
Application/ 
database 
server 

230 chapter 7 / Wireless Network Security 
■■ Either sensitive data should be prohibited from storage on the mobile device 
or it should be encrypted. 
■■ IT staff should also have the ability to remotely access devices, wipe the device 
of all data, and then disable the device in the event of loss or theft. 
■■ The organization may prohibit all installation of third-party applications, 
implement 
whitelisting to prohibit installation of all unapproved applications, 
or implement a secure sandbox that isolates the organization’s data and applications 
from all other data and applications on the mobile device. Any application 
that is on an approved list should be accompanied by a digital signature 
and a public-key certificate from an approved authority. 
■■ The organization can implement and enforce restrictions on what devices can 
synchronize and on the use of cloud-based storage. 
■■ To deal with the threat of untrusted content, security responses can include 
training of personnel on the risks inherent in untrusted content and disabling 
camera use on corporate mobile devices. 
■■ To counter the threat of malicious use of location services, the security policy 
can dictate that such service is disabled on all mobile devices. 
Traffic Security Traffic security is based on the usual mechanisms for encryption 
and authentication. All traffic should be encrypted and travel by secure means, such 
as SSL or IPv6. Virtual private networks (VPNs) can be configured so that all traffic 
between the mobile device and the organization’s network is via a VPN. 
A strong authentication protocol should be used to limit the access from the 
device to the resources of the organization. Often, a mobile device has a single 
device-
specific authenticator, because it is assumed that the device has only one 
user. A preferable strategy is to have a two-layer authentication mechanism, which 
involves authenticating the device and then authenticating the user of the device. 
Barrier Security The organization should have security mechanisms to protect 
the network from unauthorized access. The security strategy can also include firewall 
policies specific to mobile device traffic. Firewall policies can limit the scope 
of data and application access for all mobile devices. Similarly, intrusion detection 
and intrusion prevention systems can be configured to have tighter rules for mobile 
device traffic. 
7.3 IE 802.11 Wireless Lan Overview 
IEEE 802 is a committee that has developed standards for a wide range of local area 
networks (LANs). In 1990, the IEEE 802 Committee formed a new working group, 
IEEE 802.11, with a charter to develop a protocol and transmission specifications 
for wireless LANs (WLANs). Since that time, the demand for WLANs at different 
frequencies and data rates has exploded. Keeping pace with this demand, the IEEE 
802.11 working group has issued an ever-expanding list of standards. Table 7.1 
briefly defines key terms used in the IEEE 802.11 standard. 

