THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT FOR THE PODCAST

What are key threats to wireless and mobile device security

PARTICIPANTS

Prof Iqbal Gondal, FIEAust, GAICD, OELP (Oxford)|Associate Dean|CSS

Sean Duca, Vice President Regional Chief Security Officer Asia Pacific & Japan Palo Alto Networks

[BEGINNING OF RECORDED MATERIAL]

[RMIT University logo animation]

Iqbal:Thank you, Sean, for joining us. Could you please tell us a bit about your work and your role 
within the company?

Sean:Hi. I'm Sean Duca, the chief security officer for Peloton Networks for the Asia-Pacific and Japan 
region. I've been with the company now for a little over seven years. And my role is really to 
help an organisation and executives at large to understand what are the cybersecurity 
challenges that are actually out there, what their peers are actually doing to try and solve that, 
and also help an organisation build a security strategy. And a security strategy is not simply a 
shopping list of products, but more around, how do we actually start to think about better 
ways to try and solve the security problems that they may or may not actually be aware of 
today.

Iqbal:OK, so what are the most common threats to wireless security and mobile device security?

Sean:From a wireless standpoint, the most common ones typically are piggybacking. So 
piggybacking on your neighbour's wireless access point. So if you think about it today, you 
would-- if you'd need to actually get an internet connection, you'd go to your wireless settings, 
and you'll end up seeing a range of different sort of connections that are actually out there. 
Piggybacking is the most common one where you're simply just looking at anyone that 
doesn't have a secured wireless access point that you simply go on and see can you actually 
get on and get some free internet.

That kind of leads me onto the second one, which is really around the concept of what's called 
war driving. So if you drive around your streets and suburbs, you would actually be able to do 
the same thing. So rather than actually being in a fixed location, that there's only going to be, 
let's say, 10 wireless access points nearby, war driving allows you to start to collect and work 
out who in your area has a open wireless access point that doesn't have any security that may 
potentially be able to give you some free access to the internet.

Once you're actually on there, the other wireless threats really start to pop up are really 
around sniffing someone else's wireless traffic, getting access to maybe some of their 
computers and systems that are actually on their own network. So if I'm connecting to 
someone else's network, I may be able to start to see that they've got a couple of other 


devices. It could be a network attached storage device that's actually out there. So all of their 
photos, and videos, and things like that, I may be able to get access to it.

The other wireless threats typically will end up being the theft of the actual mobile device 
itself. If I start to break it down and think about it from the other side of it, which is around the 
mobile device security threats and challenges that are actually out there, most common ones 
typically would be data loss prevention, or data leakage from an actual malicious app.

So today, when you actually build an app, whether it's on the Google or Apple App Store, 
you're effectively saying, this app does x. They go through all their tests and rigour to work 
out, does the actual app do what it's supposed to do? Sometimes, it can actually start to leak a 
whole bunch of information. So there's been times where many years ago, researchers 
created something like a flashlight before there was actually a flashlight or a torch that was 
built into your phone. There's about 25 different flashlights that are actually available for 
download from the App Store.

Some of those actually downloaded your contacts and a whole bunch of other things that are 
actually on your phone as well. So that would be an example of data leakage. Another one 
would actually be the threats that relate to unsecure public Wi-Fi. I could actually start to 
pretend like I am a, say, a wireless access point. You think, oh yeah. This looks like it's the 
coffee shop's wireless access point. Well, I could actually have one sitting in my backpack 
pretending to be one, I have a stronger connection, and you're going to automatically connect 
to that one instead.

So that would be one big threat mobile device that's actually out there. The other ones 
typically come into poor password habits. A lot of the times, and I think everyone could 
probably start to think about that they've got at least one username and password that's 
probably re-used in multiple sites. If you're using the same username and password on 
multiple sites, all it takes is an attacker to break into one of those sites and automatically 
they've got access to, let's say, a hundred different other websites.

It's common that once someone actually finds a username and password and they get the 
complete list from a website, they will automatically go off and access a hundred, maybe even 
a thousand of the most common popular websites that are actually out there. So if I'm using 
the same username and password on a range of other sites, they probably now get access to 
a couple of other sites as well.

Iqbal:Why are domestic wireless LANs considered more vulnerable to drive by cyber attacks?

Sean:Domestic wireless LAN are very vulnerable. And a lot of that really comes down to the fact that 
no one really changes anything that they get from the devices that are actually provided by 
their ISP. So if you think about it today, if I wanted to get an internet connection, I call up an 
ISP, and you're going to be given a router. That router has a little sticker on the back that says, 
this is the actual device settings. It's going to be the settings to actually get into the actual 
product, or the user interface.

Some of those are a little bit more sophisticated these days compared to how they used to be 
in the old days, which was just simply admin admin. You can get the manual for every single 
domestic wireless access point that's actually available today. And the username and 
password is actually printed in those manuals.

So it doesn't take too long to try and work out who's actually got an insecure wireless access 
point, i.e., there's no security turned on. And then once you're actually in there, you can simply 
say, if I've got an IP address from this particular device, if I found out what the router or the 
gateway for that actual IP address, I could just grab that, and I'm going to simply put that into 


my browser. And I can quickly work out what is the actual device type that's there. And then I 
can just start playing around with admin passwords.

So they are more vulnerable for the fact that there is no real sort of inherent security typically 
that's turned on by default in those devices.

Iqbal:OK, so how can wireless LAN drive by attacks be prevented?

Sean:The best way to actually prevent a drive by attack is by simply turning on the security 
functionality that's built into those wireless access points. So if you actually turn on the ability 
that you could use WPA2 as an example, which is a protocol that's used to protect wireless 
communication, that would be the best way.

Changing the default username and password would be the best thing you could actually do 
the moment you actually get any of these devices. You won't have to log into this thing every 
single day. But making it complex is going to be one sure way that you can protect your home 
and all those devices that are sitting behind that wireless access point.

Iqbal:How can mobile devices be made secure to prevent cyber attacks on applications like e-
banking?

Sean:The best way to secure and protect your mobile device and prevent any type of cyber attack is 
one, always ensure that you're providing the ability for your phone, your mobile device, 
whatever it may be, to actually get the updates installed. Go into the App Store, make sure 
that you automatically have the updates applied. If you're using an old phone, a lot of those 
older ones, and even the older operating systems, they're going to force the ability to 
automatically update software.

Go off and force the installation of all those updates. Software was created by humans. And 
sometimes, we could actually make a mistake. We could actually create some problem that's 
actually there. Or someone inadvertently finds a problem that no one actually ever knew 
about. And that's why we actually have patches come out for those applications. So making 
sure that you update the applications, as well as the operating system, is probably the best 
way to do it.

Most of the applications these days typically have some form of protection built into the 
application the way that it communicates to, let's say, a bank. A banking application secures 
the communication between your app and the actual bank itself. Think about how you actually 
connect to the internet. If there is a public Wi-Fi that's actually out there, think about what 
type of things are you actually doing on that public Wi-Fi.

If you're on a web browser as an example and you're actually sort of doing something where 
you're sending some information there and you're not using any form of encryption that's 
there, an encryption would actually be if you're on a website that's HTTP versus HTTPS, which 
is the encrypted one.

If you're on a HTTP website and you're on a public Wi-Fi, anyone who's on that public Wi-Fi 
that is actually sniffing to see who else is actually on there, what type of traffic is actually out 
there, they could actually capture any information you're sharing in that point. So just always 
think about where you're connected to and what type of information you're sharing.

The other key part is making sure that you just don't instal anything and everything from 
anywhere. Google has the ability that you could actually start to access non Google Play 
stores. And even though they are effectively a store that you can instal an application, they 
give you the ability that you could basically instal something from the side. Apple themselves 


effectively say if it's not stuff from the App Store, then nothing can be installed on the device. 
Just always be very, very mindful of where you get your applications from if you are using a 
non Apple device, as an example.

And again, the other key part is making sure that you're using a very strong password. 
Because again, if that's actually in the clear, because you've been sharing that with someone 
else for some reason, someone else could actually capture that information.

Iqbal:Thanks so much for joining us.

[RMIT University logo animation]

[END OF RECORDED MATERIAL]


