Part Five: LegaL and ethicaL issues 

CHAPTER 
Legal and Ethical Aspects 

14.1 Cybercrime and Computer Crime 
Types of Computer Crime 
Law Enforcement Challenges 
Working with Law Enforcement 

14.2 Intellectual Property 
Types of Intellectual Property 
Intellectual Property Relevant to Network and Computer Security 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
Digital Rights Management 

14.3 Privacy 
Privacy Law and Regulation 
Organizational Response 
Computer Usage Privacy 
Privacy and Data Surveillance 

14.4 Ethical Issues 
Ethics and the IS Professions 
Ethical Issues Related to Computers and Information Systems 
Codes of Conduct 
The Rules 

14.5 Recommended Reading 
14.6 References 
14.7 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 
Key Terms 
Review Questions 
Problems 

14.A Information Privacy 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

2 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

LEARNING OBJECTIVES 

After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 
◆■ Discuss the different types of computer crime. 
◆■ Understand the types of intellectual property. 
◆■ Present an overview of key issues in the area of privacy. 
◆■ Compare and contrast various approaches to codifying computer ethics. 

The legal and ethical aspects of computer security encompass a broad range of topics, 
and a full discussion is well beyond the scope of this text. In this chapter, we touch on a 
few important topics in this area. 

14.1 CYBERCRIME AND COMPUTER CRIME 
The bulk of this text examines technical approaches to the detection, prevention, 
and recovery from computer and network attacks. One other tool is the deterrent 
factor of law enforcement. Many types of computer attacks can be considered 
crimes and, as such, carry criminal sanctions. This section begins with a classification 
of types of computer crime and then looks at some of the unique law-enforcement 
challenges of dealing with computer crime. 

Types of Computer Crime 

Computer crime, or cybercrime, is a term used broadly to describe criminal activity 
in which computers or computer networks are a tool, a target, or a place of criminal 
activity.1 These categories are not exclusive, and many activities can be characterized 
as falling in one or more categories. The term cybercrime has a connotation of 
the use of networks specifically, whereas computer crime may or may not involve 
networks. 

The U.S. Department of Justice [DOJ00] categorizes computer crime based 
on the role that the computer plays in the criminal activity, as follows: 

■■ Computers as targets: This form of crime targets a computer system, to acquire 
information stored on that computer system, to control the target system without 
authorization or payment (theft of service), or to alter the integrity of 
data or interfere with the availability of the computer or server. This form of 
crime involves an attack on data integrity, system integrity, data confidentiality, 
privacy, or availability. 

1This definition is from the New York Law School Course on Cybercrime, Cyberterrorism, and Digital 
Law Enforcement (information-retrieval.info/cybercrime/index.html). 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.1 / CybERCRimE And ComPuTER CRimE 3 
■■ Computers as storage devices: Computers can be used to further unlawful 
activity by using a computer or a computer device as a passive storage medium. 
For example, the computer can be used to store stolen password lists, credit 
card or calling card numbers, proprietary corporate information, pornographic 
image files, or “warez” (pirated commercial software). 

■■ Computers as communications tools: Many of the crimes falling within this 
category are simply traditional crimes that are committed online. Examples 
include the illegal sale of prescription drugs, controlled substances, alcohol, 
and guns; fraud; gambling; and child pornography. 

A more specific list of crimes, shown in Table 14.1, is defined in the international 
Convention on Cybercrime.2 This is a useful list because it represents an 
international consensus on what constitutes computer crime, or cybercrime, and 
what crimes are considered important. 

Yet another categorization is used in the CERT 2007 E-crime Survey, the 
results of which are shown in Table 14.2. The figures in the second column indicate 
the percentage of respondents who report at least one incident in the corresponding 
row category. Entries in the remaining three columns indicate the percentage of 
respondents who reported a given source for an attack.3 

Law Enforcement Challenges 

The deterrent effect of law enforcement on computer and network attacks correlates 
with the success rate of criminal arrest and prosecution. The nature of cybercrime 
is such that consistent success is extraordinarily difficult. To see this, consider what 
[KSHE06] refers to as the vicious cycle of cybercrime, involving law enforcement 
agencies, cybercriminals, and cybercrime victims. 

For law enforcement agencies, cybercrime presents some unique difficulties. 
Proper investigation requires a fairly sophisticated grasp of the technology. 
Although some agencies, particularly larger agencies, are catching up in this area, 
many jurisdictions lack investigators knowledgeable and experienced in dealing 
with this kind of crime. Lack of resources represents another handicap. Some cybercrime 
investigations require considerable computer processing power, communications 
capacity, and storage capacity, which may be beyond the budget of individual 
jurisdictions. The global nature of cybercrime is an additional obstacle: Many crimes 
will involve perpetrators who are remote from the target system, in another jurisdiction 
or even another country. A lack of collaboration and cooperation with remote 

2 The 2001 Convention on Cybercrime (European Treaty Series - No. 185, Budapest 23.X1.2001) is the 
first international treaty seeking to address Internet crimes by harmonizing national laws, improving 
investigative techniques, and increasing cooperation among nations. It was developed by the Council of 
Europe and has been ratified by 43 nations, including the United States.The Convention includes a list of 
crimes that each signatory state must transpose into its own law. 

3Note that the sum of the figures in the last three columns for a given row may exceed 100%, because a 
respondent may report multiple incidents in multiple source categories (e.g., a respondent experiences 
both insider and outsider denial-of-service attacks). 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

4 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

Table 14.1 Cybercrimes Cited in the Convention on Cybercrime 

Article 2 Illegal access 
The access to the whole or any part of a computer system without right. 
Article 3 Illegal interception 
The interception without right, made by technical means, of non-public transmissions of computer 
data to, from or within a computer system, including electromagnetic emissions from a computer 
system carrying such computer data. 
Article 4 Data interference 
The damaging, deletion, deterioration, alteration or suppression of computer data without right. 
Article 5 System interference 
The serious hindering without right of the functioning of a computer system by inputting, 
transmitting, damaging, deleting, deteriorating, altering or suppressing computer data. 
Article 6 Misuse of devices 
a. The production, sale, procurement for use, import, distribution or otherwise making available of: 
i. A device, including a computer program, designed or adapted primarily for the purpose of 
committing any of the offences established in accordance with the above Articles 2 through 5; 
ii. A computer password, access code, or similar data by which the whole or any part of a 
computer system is capable of being accessed, with intent that it be used for the purpose of 
committing any of the offences established in the above Articles 2 through 5; and 
b. The possession of an item referred to in paragraphs (a.i) or (ii) above, with intent that it be used 
for the purpose of committing any of the offences established in the above Articles 2 through 5. 
A Party may require by law that a number of such items be possessed before criminal liability 
attaches. 
Article 7 Computer-related forgery 
The input, alteration, deletion, or suppression of computer data, resulting in inauthentic data with 
the intent that it be considered or acted upon for legal purposes as if it were authentic, regardless 
whether or not the data is directly readable and intelligible. 
Article 8 Computer-related fraud 
The causing of a loss of property to another person by: 
a. Any input, alteration, deletion or suppression of computer data; 
b. Any interference with the functioning of a computer system, with fraudulent or dishonest intent 
of procuring, without right, an economic benefit for oneself or for another person. 
Article 9 Offenses related to child pornography 
a. Producing child pornography for the purpose of its distribution through a computer system; 
b. Offering or making available child pornography through a computer system; 
c. Distributing or transmitting child pornography through a computer system; 
d. Procuring child pornography through a computer system for oneself or for another person; 
e. Possessing child pornography in a computer system or on a computer-data storage medium. 
Article 10 Infringements of copyright and related rights 
Article 11 Attempt and aiding or abetting 
Aiding or abetting the commission of any of the offences established in accordance with the above 
Articles 2 through 10 of the present Convention with intent that such offence be committed. An 
attempt to commit any of the offences established in accordance with Articles 3 through 5, 7, 8, and 
(9..a) and (c) of this Convention. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.1 / CybERCRimE And ComPuTER CRimE 5 
Table 14.2 CERT 2006 E-Crime Watch Survey Results 

Committed 
(net %) Insider (%) 
Outsider 
(%) 
Source 
Unknown 
(%) 
Theft of intellectual property 30 63 45 5 
Theft of other (proprietary) info 
including customer records, financial 
records, etc. 
36 56 49 9 
Denial of service attacks 36 0 84 20 
Virus, worms or other malicious code 72 23 80 16 
Fraud (credit card fraud, etc.) 29 47 69 18 
Identity theft of customer 19 46 79 4 
Illegal generation of spam e-mail 40 10 78 20 
Phishing (someone posing as your 
company online in an attempt to gain 
personal data from your subscribers or 
employees) 
31 0 77 26 
Unauthorized access to/use of 
information, systems or networks 
60 47 60 13 
Sabotage: deliberate disruption, 
deletion, or destruction of information, 
systems, or networks 
33 49 41 15 
Extortion 33 49 41 15 
Web site defacement 14 22 78 6 
Zombie machines on organization’s 
network/bots/use of network by 
BotNets 
20 16 72 28 
Intentional exposure of private or 
sensitive information 
11 71 36 7 
Spyware (not including adware) 51 17 73 17 
Other 11 50 43 21 

law enforcement agencies can greatly hinder an investigation. Initiatives such as 
international Convention on Cybercrime are a promising sign. The Convention at 
least introduces a common terminology for crimes and a framework for harmonizing 
laws globally. 

The relative lack of success in bringing cybercriminals to justice has led to an 
increase in their numbers, boldness, and the global scale of their operations. It is 
difficult to profile cybercriminals in the way that is often done with other types of 
repeat offenders. The cybercriminal tends to be young and very computer-savvy, 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

6 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

but the range of behavioral characteristics is wide. Further, there exist no cybercriminal 
databases that can point investigators to likely suspects. 

The success of cybercriminals, and the relative lack of success of law enforcement, 
influences the behavior of cybercrime victims. As with law enforcement, 
many organizations that may be the target of attack have not invested sufficiently 
in technical, physical, and human-factor resources to prevent attacks. Reporting 
rates tend to be low because of a lack of confidence in law enforcement, a concern 
about corporate reputation, and a concern about civil liability. The low reporting 
rates and the reluctance to work with law enforcement on the part of victims feeds 
into the handicaps under which law enforcement works, completing the vicious 
cycle. 

Working with Law Enforcement 

Executive management and security administrators need to look upon law enforcement 
as another resource and tool, alongside technical, physical, and human-factor 
resources. The successful use of law enforcement depends much more on people 
skills than technical skills. Management needs to understand the criminal investigation 
process, the inputs that investigators need, and the ways in which the victim can 
contribute positively to the investigation. 

14.2 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
The U.S. legal system, and legal systems generally, distinguish three primary types 
of property: 

■■ Real property: Land and things permanently attached to the land, such as 
trees, buildings, and stationary mobile homes. 

■■ Personal property: Personal effects, moveable property and goods, such as cars, 
bank accounts, wages, securities, a small business, furniture, insurance policies, 
jewelry, patents, pets, and season baseball tickets. 

■■ Intellectual property: Any intangible asset that consists of human knowledge 
and ideas. Examples include software, data, novels, sound recordings, the 
design of a new type of mousetrap, or a cure for a disease. 

This section focuses on the computer security aspects of intellectual property. 

Types of Intellectual Property 

There are three main types of intellectual property for which legal protection is 
available: copyrights, trademarks, and patents. The legal protection is against 
infringement, which is the invasion of the rights secured by copyrights, trademarks, 
and patents. The right to seek civil recourse against anyone infringing his or her 
property is granted to the IP owner. Depending upon the type of IP, infringement 
may vary (Figure 14.1). 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 7 
Patents 
Unauthorized 
making, 
using or selling 
Trademarks 
Unauthorized use or 
colorable imitation 
Copyrights 
Unauthorized use 
Figure 14.1 Intellectual Property Infringement 

Copyrights Copyright law protects the tangible or fixed expression of an idea, not 
the idea itself. A creator can claim copyright, and file for the copyright at a national 
government copyright office, if the following conditions are fulfilled:4 

■■ The proposed work is original. 

■■ The creator has put this original idea into a concrete form, such as hard copy 
(paper), software, or multimedia form. 

Examples of items that may be copyrighted include the following [BRAU01]: 

■■ Literary works: Novels, nonfiction prose, poetry, newspaper articles and newspapers, 
magazine articles and magazines, catalogs, brochures, ads (text), and 
compilations such as business directories 

■■ Musical works: Songs, advertising jingles, and instrumentals 

■■ Dramatic works: Plays, operas, and skits 

■■ Pantomimes and choreographic works: Ballets, modern dance, jazz dance, and 
mime works 

■■ Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works: Photographs, posters, maps, paintings, 
drawings, graphic art, display ads, cartoon strips and cartoon characters, stuffed 
animals, statues, paintings, and works of fine art 

■■ Motion pictures and other audiovisual works: Movies, documentaries, travelogues, 
training films and videos, television shows, television ads, and interactive 
multimedia works 

4Copyright is automatically assigned to newly created works in countries that subscribe to the Berne 
convention, which encompasses the vast majority of nations. Some countries, such as the United States, 
provide additional legal protection if the work is registered. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

8 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Sound recordings: Recordings of music, sound, or words 
■■ Architectural works: Building designs, whether in the form of architectural 
plans, drawings, or the constructed building itself 
■■ Software-related works: Computer software, software documentation and 
manuals, training manuals, and other manuals 
The copyright owner has the following exclusive rights, protected against 

infringement: 
■■ Reproduction right: Lets the owner make copies of a work 
■■ Modification right: Also known as the derivative-works right, concerns modi


fying a work to create a new or derivative work 
■■ Distribution right: Lets the owner publicly sell, rent, lease, or lend copies of 

the work 
■■ Public-performance right: Applies mainly to live performances 
■■ Public-display right: Lets the owner publicly show a copy of the work directly 

or by means of a film, slide, or television image 

patents A patent for an invention is the grant of a property right to the inventor. 
The right conferred by the patent grant is, in the language of the U.S. statute and 
of the grant itself, “the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, 
or selling” the invention in the United States or “importing” the invention into the 
United States. Similar wording appears in the statutes of other nations. There are 
three types of patents: 

■■ Utility patents: May be granted to anyone who invents or discovers any new 
and useful process, machine, article of manufacture, or composition of matter, 
or any new and useful improvement thereof; 

■■ Design patents: May be granted to anyone who invents a new, original, and 
ornamental design for an article of manufacture; and 
■■ Plant patents: May be granted to anyone who invents or discovers and asexually 
reproduces any distinct and new variety of plant. 

An example of a patent from the computer security realm is the RSA public-
key cryptosystem. From the time it was granted in 1983 until the patent expired in 
2000, the patent holder, RSA Security, was entitled to receive a fee for each implementation 
of RSA. 

trademarks A trademark is a word, name, symbol, or device that is used in trade 
with goods to indicate the source of the goods and to distinguish them from the 
goods of others. A servicemark is the same as a trademark except that it identifies 
and distinguishes the source of a service rather than a product. The terms trademark 
and mark are commonly used to refer to both trademarks and servicemarks. 
Trademark rights may be used to prevent others from using a confusingly similar 
mark, but not to prevent others from making the same goods or from selling the 
same goods or services under a clearly different mark. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 9 
Intellectual Property Relevant to Network and Computer 
Security 

A number of forms of intellectual property are relevant in the context of network 
and computer security. Here we mention some of the most prominent: 

■■ Software: This includes programs produced by vendors of commercial software 
(e.g., operating systems, utility programs, applications) as well as shareware, 
proprietary software created by an organization for internal use, and 
software produced by individuals. For all such software, copyright protection 
is available if desired. In some cases, a patent protection may also be 
appropriate. 

■■ Databases: A database may consist of data that is collected and organized in 
such a fashion that it has potential commercial value. An example is an economic 
forecasting database. Such databases may be protected by copyright. 

■■ Digital content: This category includes audio files, video files, multimedia, 
courseware, Web site content, and any other original digital work that can be 
presented in some fashion using computers or other digital devices. 

■■ Algorithms: An example of a patentable algorithm, previously cited, is the 
RSA public-key cryptosystem. 

Digital Millennium Copyright Act 

The U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) has had a profound effect 
on the protection of digital content rights in both the United States and worldwide. 
The DMCA, signed into law in 1998, is designed to implement World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) treaties, signed in 1996. In essence, DMCA 
strengthens the protection of copyrighted materials in digital format. 

The DMCA encourages copyright owners to use technological measures 
to protect copyrighted works. These measures fall into two categories: measures 
that prevent access to the work and measures that prevent copying of the work. 
Further, the law prohibits attempts to bypass such measures. Specifically, the 
law states that “no person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under this title.” Among other effects 
of this clause, it prohibits almost all unauthorized decryption of content. The 
law further prohibits the manufacture, release, or sale of products, services, and 
devices that can crack encryption designed to thwart either access to or copying 
of material unauthorized by the copyright holder. Both criminal and civil penalties 
apply to attempts to circumvent technological measures and to assist in such 
circumvention. 

Certain actions are exempted from the provisions of the DMCA and other 
copyright laws, including the following: 

■■ Fair use: This concept is not tightly defined. It is intended to permit others to 
perform, show, quote, copy, and otherwise distribute portions of the work for 
certain purposes. These purposes include review, comment, and discussion of 
copyrighted works. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

10 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Reverse engineering: Reverse engineering of a software product is allowed if 
the user has the right to use a copy of the program and if the purpose of the 
reverse engineering is not to duplicate the functionality of the program but 
rather to achieve interoperability. 

■■ Encryption research: “Good faith” encryption research is allowed. In essence, 
this exemption allows decryption attempts to advance the development of 
encryption technology. 

■■ Security testing: This is the access of a computer or network for the good faith 
testing, investigating, or correcting a security flaw or vulnerability, with the 
authorization of the owner or operator. 

■■ Personal privacy: It is generally permitted to bypass technological measures if 
that is the only reasonable way to prevent the access to result in the revealing 
or recording of personally identifying information. 

Despite the exemptions built into the Act, there is considerable concern, 
especially in the research and academic communities, that the act inhibits legitimate 
security and encryption research. These parties feel that DMCA stifles innovation 
and academic freedom and is a threat to open source software development 
[ACM04]. 

Digital Rights Management 

Digital Rights Management (DRM) refers to systems and procedures that ensure 
that holders of digital rights are clearly identified and receive the stipulated payment 
for their works. The systems and procedures may also impose further restrictions 
on the use of digital objects, such as inhibiting printing or prohibiting further 
distribution. 

There is no single DRM standard or architecture. DRM encompasses a variety 
of approaches to intellectual property management and enforcement by providing 
secure and trusted automated services to control the distribution and use of 
content. In general, the objective is to provide mechanisms for the complete content 
management life cycle (creation, subsequent contribution by others, access, 
distribution, use), including the management of rights information associated with 
the content. 

DRM systems should meet the following objectives: 

1. Provide persistent content protection against unauthorized access to the digital 
content, limiting access to only those with the proper authorization. 
2. Support a variety of digital content types (e.g., music files, video streams, digital 
books, images). 
3. Support content use on a variety of platforms, (e.g., PCs, PDAs, iPods, mobile 
phones). 
4. Support content distribution on a variety of media, including CD-ROMs, 
DVDs, and flash memory. 
Figure 14.2, based on [LIU03], illustrates a typical DRM model in terms of the 
principal users of DRM systems: 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 11 
Protectedcontent 
Paying 
royalty fees 
Usagerules 
Digitallicense 
Protectedcontent 
Requiringlicense and paying 
Information ow 
Paying distribution 
Money ow 
Figure 14.2 DRM Components 

■■ Content provider: Holds the digital rights of the content and wants to protect 
these rights. Examples are a music record label and a movie studio. 

■■ Distributor: Provides distribution channels, such as an online shop or a Web 
retailer. For example, an online distributor receives the digital content from 
the content provider and creates a Web catalog presenting the content and 
rights metadata for the content promotion. 

■■ Consumer: Uses the system to access the digital content by retrieving downloadable 
or streaming content through the distribution channel and then paying 
for the digital license. The player/viewer application used by the consumer 
takes charge of initiating license request to the clearinghouse and enforcing 
the content usage rights. 

■■ Clearinghouse: Handles the financial transaction for issuing the digital license 
to the consumer and pays royalty fees to the content provider and distribution 
fees to the distributor accordingly. The clearinghouse is also responsible for 
logging license consumptions for every consumer. 

In this model, the distributor need not enforce the access rights. Instead, the 
content provider protects the content in such a way (typically encryption) that the 
consumer must purchase a digital license and access capability from the clearinghouse. 
The clearinghouse consults usage rules provided by the content provider 
to determine what access is permitted and the fee for a particular type of access. 
Having collected the fee, the clearinghouse credits the content provider and distributor 
appropriately. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

12 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

Figure 14.3 shows a generic system architecture to support DRM functionality. 
The system is access by parties in three roles. Rights holders are the content 
providers, who either created the content or have acquired rights to the content. 
Service providers include distributors and clearinghouses. Consumers are those 
who purchase the right to access to content for specific uses. There is system interface 
to the services provided by the DRM system: 

■■ Identity management: Mechanisms to uniquely identify entities, such as parties 
and content 
■■ Content management: Processes and functions needed to manage the content 
lifestyle 
■■ Rights management: Processes and functions needed to manage rights, rights 
holders, and associated requirements 

Below these management modules are a set of common functions. The 
security/encryption module provides functions to encrypt content and to sign license 
agreements. The identity management service makes use of the authentication and 
authorization functions to identify all parties in the relationship. Using these functions, 
the identity management service includes the following: 

■■ Allocation of unique party identifiers 
■■ User profile and preferences 
■■ User’s device management 
■■ Public-key management 

ROLESSERVICESFUNCTIONS
Figure 14.3 DRM System Architecutre 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.3 / PRivACy 13 
Billing/payments functions deal with the collection of usage fees from consumers 
and the distribution of payments to rights holders and distributors. Delivery 
functions deal with the delivery of content to consumers. 

14.3 PRIVACY 
An issue with considerable overlap with computer security is that of privacy. On 
the one hand, the scale and interconnectedness of personal information collected 
and stored in information systems has increased dramatically, motivated by law 
enforcement, national security, and economic incentives. The last mentioned has 
been perhaps the main driving force. In a global information economy, it is likely 
that the most economically valuable electronic asset is aggregations of information 
on individuals [HAYE09]. On the other hand, individuals have become increasingly 
aware of the extent to which government agencies, businesses, and even Internet 
users have access to their personal information and private details about their lives 
and activities. 

Concerns about the extent to which personal privacy has been and may be 
compromised have led to a variety of legal and technical approaches to reinforcing 
privacy rights. 

Privacy Law and Regulation 

A number of international organizations and national governments have introduced 
laws and regulations intended to protect individual privacy. We look at two 
such initiatives in this subsection. 

european union data proteCtion direCtive In 1998, the EU adopted the 
Directive on Data Protection to both (1) ensure that member states protected fundamental 
privacy rights when processing personal information, and (2) prevent 
member states from restricting the free flow of personal information within the EU. 
The Directive is not itself a law, but requires member states to enact laws encompassing 
its terms. The Directive is organized around the following principles of personal 
information use: 

■■ Notice: Organizations must notify individuals what personal information they 
are collecting, the uses of that information, and what choices the individual 
may have. 

■■ Consent: Individuals must be able to choose whether and how their personal 
information is used by, or disclosed to, third parties. They have the right not to 
have any sensitive information collected or used without express permission, 
including race, religion, health, union membership, beliefs, and sex life. 

■■ Consistency: Organizations may use personal information only in accordance 
with the terms of the notice given the data subject and any choices with respect 
to its use exercised by the subject. 

■■ Access: Individuals must have the right and ability to access their information 
and correct, modify, or delete any portion of it. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Security: Organizations must provide adequate security, using technical and 
other means, to protect the integrity and confidentiality of personal information. 

■■ Onward transfer: Third parties receiving personal information must provide 
the same level of privacy protection as the organization from whom the information 
is obtained. 

■■ Enforcement: The Directive grants a private right of action to data subjects 
when organizations do not follow the law. In addition, each EU member has 
a regulatory enforcement agency concerned with privacy rights enforcement. 

united states privaCy initiatives The first comprehensive privacy legislation 
adopted in the United States was the Privacy Act of 1974, which dealt with personal 
information collected and used by federal agencies. The Act is intended to 

1. Permit individuals to determine what records pertaining to them are collected, 
maintained, used, or disseminated. 
2. Permit individuals to forbid records obtained for one purpose to be used for 
another purpose without consent. 
3. Permit individuals to obtain access to records pertaining to them and to correct 
and amend such records as appropriate. 
4. Ensure that agencies collect, maintain, and use personal information in a manner 
that ensures that the information is current, adequate, relevant, and not 
excessive for its intended use. 
5. Create a private right of action for individuals whose personal information is 
not used in accordance with the Act. 
As with all privacy laws and regulations, there are exceptions and conditions 

attached to this Act, such as criminal investigations, national security concerns, and 

conflicts between competing individual rights of privacy. 

While the 1974 Privacy Act covers government records, a number of other 

U.S. laws have been enacted that cover other areas, including the following: 
■■ Banking and financial records: Personal banking information is protected 
in certain ways by a number of laws, including the recent Financial Services 
Modernization Act. 

■■ Credit reports: The Fair Credit Reporting Act confers certain rights on individuals 
and obligations on credit reporting agencies. 

■■ Medical and health insurance records: A variety of laws have been in place for 
decades dealing with medical records privacy.The Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPPA) created significant new rights for patients to 
protect and access their own health information. 

■■ Children’s privacy: The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act places restrictions 
on online organizations in the collection of data from children under the 
age of 13. 

■■ Electronic communications: The Electronic Communications Privacy Act generally 
prohibits unauthorized and intentional interception of wire an electronic 
communications during the transmission phase and unauthorized accessing of 
electronically stored wire and electronic communications. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.3 / PRivACy 15 
Organizational Response 

Organizations need to deploy both management controls and technical measures 
to comply with laws and regulations concerning privacy as well as to implement 
corporate policies concerning employee privacy. ISO 27002 (Code of Practice for 
Information Security Management) states the requirement as follows: 

ISO 27002: Data protection and privacy of personal information 

An organizational data protection and privacy policy should be developed and 
implemented. This policy should be communicated to all persons involved in the 
processing of personal information. Compliance with this policy and all relevant 
data protection legislation and regulations requires appropriate management 
structure and control. Often this is best achieved by the appointment of a responsible 
person, such as a data protection officer, who should provide guidance to 
managers, users, and service providers on their individual responsibilities and the 
specific procedures that should be followed. Responsibility for handling personal 
information and ensuring awareness of the data protection principles should be 
dealt with in accordance with relevant legislation and regulations. Appropriate 
technical and organizational measures to protect personal information should be 
implemented. 

An excellent, detailed list of considerations for organizational implementation 
of privacy controls is provided in The Standard of Good Practice for Information 
Security, from the Information Security Forum [ISF12]. This material is reproduced 
in Appendix 14A. 

Computer Usage Privacy 

The Common Criteria specification [CCPS09] includes a definition of a set of functional 
requirements in a Privacy Class, which should be implemented in a trusted 
system. The purpose of the privacy functions is to provide a user protection against 
discovery and misuse of identity by other users. This specification is a useful guide 
to how to design privacy support functions as part of a computer system. Figure 14.4 
shows a breakdown of privacy into four major areas, each of which has one or more 
specific functions: 

■■ Anonymity: Ensures that a user may use a resource or service without disclosing 
the user’s identity. Specifically, this means that other users or subjects are 
unable to determine the identity of a user bound to a subject (e.g., process 
or user group) or operation. It further means that the system will not solicit 
the real name of a user. Anonymity need not conflict with authorization and 
access control functions, which are bound to computer-based user IDs, not to 
personal user information. 

■■ Pseudonymity: Ensures that a user may use a resource or service without 
disclosing its user identity, but can still be accountable for that use. The system 
shall provide an alias to prevent other users from determining a user’s 
identity, but the system shall be able to determine the user’s identity from an 
assigned alias. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

16 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

Privacy 
Anonymity 
Unobservability Unobservability without soliciting information 
Unobservability 
Authorised user observability 
Unlinkability Unlinkability 
Reversible pseudonymity 
Alias pseudonymity 
Anonymity 
Pseudonymity 
Anonymity without soliciting information 
Allocation of information impacting unobservability 
Pseudonymity 
Figure 14.4 Common Criteria Privacy Class Decomposition 

■■ Unlinkability: Ensures that a user may make multiple uses of resources or 
services without others being able to link these uses together. 

■■ Unobservability: Ensures that a user may use a resource or service without 
others, especially third parties, being able to observe that the resource or service 
is being used. Unobservability requires that users and/or subjects cannot 
determine whether an operation is being performed. Allocation of information 
impacting unobservability requires that the security function provide specific 
mechanisms to avoid the concentration of privacy related information within 
the system. Unobservability without soliciting information requires that the 
security function does not try to obtain privacy-related information that might 
be used to compromise unobservability. Authorized user observability requires 
the security function to provide one or more authorized users with a capability 
to observe the usage of resources and/or services. 

Note that the Common Criteria specification is primarily concerned with the privacy 
of an individual with respect to that individual’s use of computer resources, 
rather than the privacy of personal information concerning that individual. 

Privacy and Data Surveillance 

The demands of homeland security and counterterrorism have imposed new threats 
to personal privacy. Law enforcement and intelligence agencies have become 
increasingly aggressive in using data surveillance techniques to fulfill their mission. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.3 / PRivACy 17 
In addition, private organization are exploiting a number of trends to increase their 
ability to build detailed profiles of individuals, including the spread of the Internet, 
the increase in electronic payment methods, near-universal use of cellular phone 
communications, ubiquitous computation, sensor webs, and so on. 

Both policy and technical approaches are needed to protect privacy when 
both government and nongovernment organizations seek to learn as much as possible 
about individuals. In terms of technical approaches, the requirements for privacy 
protection for information systems can be addressed in the context of database 
security. That is, the approaches that are appropriate for privacy protection involve 
technical means that have been developed for database security. 

A specific proposal for a database security approach to privacy protection is 
outlined in [POPP06]. The privacy appliance is a tamper-resistant, cryptographically 
protected device that is interposed between a database and the access interface, analogous 
to a firewall or intrusion prevention device. The device implements privacy protection 
functions, including verifying the user’s access permissions and credentials and 
creating an audit log. Some of the specific functions of the appliance are as follows: 

■■ Data transformation: This function encodes or encrypts portions of the data 
so as to preserver privacy but still allow data analysis functions needed for 
effective use. An example of such data analysis functions is the detection of 
terrorist activity patterns. 

■■ Anonymization: This function removes specific identifying information from 
query results, such as last name and telephone number, but creates some 
sort of anonymized unique identifier so that analysts can detect connections 
between queries. 

■■ Selective revelation: This is a method for minimizing exposure of individual 
information while enabling continuous analysis of potentially interconnected 
data. The function initially reveals information to the analyst only in sanitized 
form, that is, in terms of statistics and categories that do not reveal (directly or 
indirectly) anyone’s private information. If the analyst sees reason for concern, he 
or she can follow up by seeking permission to get more precise information. This 
permission would be granted if the initial information provides sufficient cause 
to allow the revelation of more information, under appropriate legal and policy 
guidelines. 

■■ Immutable audit: A tamper-resistant method that identifies where data go 
and who has seen the data. The audit function automatically and permanently 
records all data accesses, with strong protection against deletion, modification, 
and unauthorized use. 

■■ Associative memory: This is a software module that can recognize patterns 
and make connections between pieces of data that the human user may have 
missed or didn’t know existed. With this method, it can discover relationships 
quickly between data points found in massive amounts of data. 

The owner of a database installs a privacy appliance tailored to the database 
content and structure and to its intended use by outside organizations. An independently 
operated privacy appliance can interact with multiple databases from multiple 
organizations to collect and interconnect data for their ultimate use by law 
enforcement, an intelligence user, or other appropriate user. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

18 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

14.4 ETHICAL ISSUES 
Because of the ubiquity and importance of information systems in organization of 
all types, there are many potential misuses and abuses of information and electronic 
communication that create privacy and security problems. In addition to questions 
of legality, misuse and abuse raise concerns of ethics. Ethics refers to a system of 
moral principles that relates to the benefits and harms of particular actions, and to 
the rightness and wrongness of motives and ends of those actions. In this section, 
we look at ethical issues as they relate to computer and information system security. 

Ethics and the IS Professions 

To a certain extent, a characterization of what constitutes ethical behavior for those 
who work with or have access to information systems is not unique to this context. 
The basic ethical principles developed by civilizations apply. However, there 
are some unique considerations surrounding computers and information systems. 
First, computer technology makes possible a scale of activities not possible before. 
This includes a larger scale of recordkeeping, particularly on individuals, with the 
ability to develop finer-grained personal information collection and more precise 
data mining and data matching. The expanded scale of communications and the 
expanded scale of interconnection brought about by the Internet magnify the power 
of an individual to do harm. Second, computer technology has involved the creation 
of new types of entities for which no agreed ethical rules have previously been 
formed, such as databases, Web browsers, chat rooms, cookies, and so on. 

Further, it has always been the case that those with special knowledge or special 
skills have additional ethical obligations beyond those common to all humanity. 
We can illustrate this in terms of an ethical hierarchy (Figure 14.5), based on one 
discussed in [GOTT99]. At the top of the hierarchy are the ethical values professionals 
share with all human beings, such as integrity, fairness, and justice. Being a 
professional with special training imposes additional ethical obligations with respect 
to those affected by his or her work. General principles applicable to all professionals 
arise at this level. Finally, each profession has associated with it specific ethical 
values and obligations related to the specific knowledge of those in the profession 
and the powers that they have to affect others. Most professions embody all of these 
levels in a professional code of conduct, a subject discussed subsequently. 

Ethical Issues Related to Computers and Information 
Systems 

Let us turn now more specifically to the ethical issues that arise from computer 
technology. Computers have become the primary repository of both personal 
information and negotiable assets, such as bank records, securities records, and 
other financial information. Other types of databases, both statistical and otherwise, 
are assets with considerable value. These assets can only be viewed, created, and 
altered by technical and automated means. Those who can understand and exploit 
the technology, plus those who have obtained access permission, have power related 
to those assets. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.4 / ETHiCAL issuEs 19 
Figure 14.5 The Ethical Hierarchy 

A classic paper on computers and ethics [PARK88] points out that ethical 
issues arise as the result of the roles of computers, such as the following: 

■■ Repositories and processors of information: Unauthorized use of otherwise 
unused computer services or of information stored in computers raises questions 
of appropriateness or fairness. 

■■ Producers of new forms and types of assets: For example, computer programs 
are entirely new types of assets, possibly not subject to the same concepts of 
ownership as other assets. 

■■ Instruments of acts: To what degree must computer services and users of computers, 
data, and programs be responsible for the integrity and appropriateness 
of computer output? 

■■ Symbols of intimidation and deception: The images of computers as thinking 
machines, absolute truth producers, infallible, subject to blame, and as anthropomorphic 
replacements of humans who err should be carefully considered. 

We are concerned with balancing professional responsibilities with ethical or 
moral responsibilities. We cite two areas here of the types of ethical questions that face 
a computing or IS professional. The first is that IS professionals may find themselves in 
situations where their ethical duty as professionals comes into conflict with loyalty to 
their employer. Such a conflict may give rise for an employee to consider “blowing the 
whistle,” or exposing a situation that can harm the public or a company’s customers. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

20 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

For example, a software developer may know that a product is scheduled to ship with 
inadequate testing to meet the employer’s deadlines. The decision of whether to blow 
the whistle is one of the most difficult that an IS professional can face. Organizations 
have a duty to provide alternative, less extreme opportunities for the employee, such 
as an in-house ombudsperson coupled with a commitment not to penalize employees 
for exposing problems in-house. Additionally, professional societies should provide a 
mechanism whereby society members can get advice on how to proceed. 

Another example of an ethical question concerns a potential conflict of interest. 
For example, if a consultant has a financial interest in a certain vendor, this 
should be revealed to any client if that vendor’s products or services might be recommended 
by the consultant. 

Codes of Conduct 

Unlike scientific and engineering fields, ethics cannot be reduced to precise laws 
or sets of facts. Although an employer or a client of a professional can expect that 
the professional has an internal moral compass, many areas of conduct may present 
ethical ambiguities. To provide guidance to professionals and to articulate what 
employers and customers have a right to expect, a number of professional societies 
have adopted ethical codes of conduct. 

A professional code of conduct can serve the following functions [GOTT99]: 

1. A code can serve two inspirational functions: as a positive stimulus for ethical 
conduct on the part of the professional, and to instill confidence in the 
customer or user of an IS product or service. However, a code that stops at 
just providing inspirational language is likely to be vague and open to an abundance 
of interpretations. 
2. A code can be educational. It informs professionals about what should be their 
commitment to undertake a certain level of quality of work and their responsibility 
for the well-being of users of their product and the public, to the extent 
the product may affect nonusers. The code also serves to educate managers on 
their responsibility to encourage and support employee ethical behavior and 
on their own ethical responsibilities. 
3. A code provides a measure of support for a professional whose decision to act 
ethically in a situation may create conflict with an employer or customer. 
4. A code can be a means of deterrence and discipline.A professional society can 
use a code as a justification for revoking membership or even a professional 
license. An employee can use a code as a basis for a disciplinary action. 
5. A code can enhance the profession’s public image, if it is seen to be widely 
honored. 
We illustrate the concept of a professional code of ethics for computer 
professionals with three specific examples. The ACM (Association for Computing 
Machinery) Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct (Figure 14.6) applies to 
computer scientists. The IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers) 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.4 / ETHiCAL issuEs 21 
1.GENERAL MORAL IMPERATIVES. 
1.1 Contribute to society and human well-being. 
1.2 Avoid harm to others. 
1.3 Be honest and trustworthy. 
1.4 Be fair and take action not to discriminate. 
1.5 Honor property rights including copyrights and patent. 
1.6 Give proper credit for intellectual property. 
1.7 Respect the privacy of others. 
1.8 Honor confidentiality. 
2.MORE SPECIFIC PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES. 
2.1 Strive to achieve the highest quality, effectiveness and dignity in both the process 
and products of professional work. 
2.2 Acquire and maintain professional competence. 
2.3 Know and respect existing laws pertaining to professional work. 
2.4 Accept and provide appropriate professional review. 
2.5 Give comprehensive and thorough evaluations of computer systems and their impacts, 
including analysis of possible risks. 
2.6 Honor contracts, agreements, and assigned responsibilities. 
2.7 Improve public understanding of computing and its consequences. 
2.8 Access computing and communication resources only when authorized to do so. 
3.ORGANIZATIONAL LEADERSHIP IMPERATIVES. 
3.1 Articulate social responsibilities of members of an organizational unit and encourage full 
acceptance of those responsibilities. 
3.2 Manage personnel and resources to design and build information systems that enhance the 
quality of working life. 
3.3 Acknowledge and support proper and authorized uses of an organization’s computing and 
communication resources. 
3.4 Ensure that users and those who will be affected by a system have their needs clearly 
articulated during the assessment and design of requirements; later the system must be 
validated to meet requirements. 
3.5 Articulate and support policies that protect the dignity of users and others affected by a 
computing system. 
3.6 Create opportunities for members of the organization to learn the principles and limitations of 
computer systems. 
4. COMPLIANCE WITH THE CODE. 
4.1 Uphold and promote the principles of this Code. 
4.2 Treat violations of this code as inconsistent with membership in the ACM. 
Figure 24.6 ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

Code of Ethics (Figure 14.7) applies to computer engineers as well as other types 
of electrical and electronic engineers. The AITP (Association of Information 
Technology Professionals, formerly the Data Processing Management Association) 
Standard of Conduct (Figure 14.8) applies to managers of computer systems and 
projects. 

A number of common themes emerge from these codes, including (1) dignity 
and worth of other people; (2) personal integrity and honesty; (3) responsibility for 
work; (4) confidentiality of information; (5) public safety, health, and welfare; (6) 
participation in professional societies to improve standards of the profession; and 

(7) the notion that public knowledge and access to technology is equivalent to social 
power. 
All three codes place their emphasis on the responsibility of professionals to 
other people, which, after all, is the central meaning of ethics. This emphasis on 
people rather than machines or software is to the good. However, the codes make 
little specific mention of the subject technology, namely computers and information 
systems. That is, the approach is quite generic and could apply to most 
professions and does not fully reflect the unique ethical problems related to the 
development and use of computer and IS technology. For example, these codes 
do not specifically deal with the issues raised by [PARK88] listed in the preceding 
subsection. 

We, the members of the IEEE, in recognition of the importance of our technologies in affecting 
the quality of life throughout the world, and in accepting a personal obligation to our profession, 
its members and the communities we serve, do hereby commit ourselves to the highest ethical and 
professional conduct and agree: 

1. to accept responsibility in making decisions consistent with the safety, health, and welfare of the 
public, and to disclose promptly factors that might endanger the public or the environment; 
2. to avoid real or perceived conflicts of interest whenever possible, and to disclose them to 
affected parties when they do exist; 
3. to be honest and realistic in stating claims or estimates based on available data; 
4. to reject bribery in all its forms; 
5. to improve the understanding of technology, its appropriate application, and potential 
consequences; 
6. to maintain and improve our technical competence and to undertake technological tasks for 
others only if qualified by training or experience, or after full disclosure of pertinent limitations; 
7. to seek, accept, and offer honest criticism of technical work, to acknowledge and correct errors, 
and to credit properly the contributions of others; 
8. to treat fairly all persons regardless of such factors as race, religion, gender, disability, age, or 
national origin; 
9. to avoid injuring others, their property, reputation, or employment by false or malicious action; 
10. to assist colleagues and co-workers in their professional development and to support them in 
following this code of ethics 
Figure 14.7 IEEE Code of Ethics 
(Copyright © 2006, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.4 / ETHiCAL issuEs 23 
In recognition of my obligation to management I shall: 

■■ Keep my personal knowledge up-to-date and insure that proper expertise is available 
when needed. 

■■ Share my knowledge with others and present factual and objective information to management 
to the best of my ability. 

■■ Accept full responsibility for work that I perform. 

■■ Not misuse the authority entrusted to me. 

■■ Not misrepresent or withhold information concerning the capabilities of equipment, software 
or systems. 

■■ Not take advantage of the lack of knowledge or inexperience on the part of others. 

In recognition of my obligation to my fellow members and the profession I shall: 

■■ Be honest in all my professional relationships. 

■■ Take appropriate action in regard to any illegal or unethical practices that come to my 
attention. However, I will bring charges against any person only when I have reasonable 

basis for believing in the truth of the allegations and without any regard to personal interest. 

■■ Endeavor to share my special knowledge. 

■■ Cooperate with others in achieving understanding and in identifying problems. 

■■ Not use or take credit for the work of others without specific acknowledgement and 

authorization. 

■■ Not take advantage of the lack of knowledge or inexperience on the part of others for 
personal gain. 

In recognition of my obligation to society I shall: 

■■ Protect the privacy and confidentiality of all information entrusted to me. 
■■ Use my skill and knowledge to inform the public in all areas of my expertise. 
■■ To the best of my ability, insure that the products of my work are used in a socially 

responsible way. 

■■ Support, respect, and abide by the appropriate local, state, provincial, and federal laws. 

■■ Never misrepresent or withhold information that is germane to a problem or situation of 

public concern nor will I allow any such known information to remain unchallenged. 

■■ Not use knowledge of a confidential or personal nature in any unauthorized manner or to 
achieve personal gain. 

In recognition of my obligation to my employer I shall: 

■■ Make every effort to ensure that I have the most current knowledge and that the proper 
expertise is available when needed. 

■■ Avoid conflict of interest and insure that my employer is aware of any potential conflicts. 

■■ Present a fair, honest, and objective viewpoint. 

■■ Protect the proper interests of my employer at all times. 

■■ Protect the privacy and confidentiality of all information entrusted to me. 

■■ Not misrepresent or withhold information that is germane to the situation. 

■■ Not attempt to use the resources of my employer for personal gain or for any purpose 
without proper approval. 

■■ Not exploit the weakness of a computer system for personal gain or personal satisfaction. 

Figure 14.8 AITP Standard of Conduct 
(Copyright © 2006, Association of Information Technology Professionals) 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

The Rules 

A different approach from the ones so far discussed is a collaborative effort to 
develop a short list of guidelines on the ethics of developing computer systems. The 
guidelines, which continue to evolve, are the product of the Ad Hoc Committee 
on Responsible Computing. Anyone can join this committee and suggest changes 
to the guidelines. The committee has published a document, regularly updated, 
entitled Moral Responsibility for Computing Artifacts, and is generally referred to 
as The Rules. The current version of The Rules is version 27, reflecting the thought 
and effort that has gone into this project. 

The term computing artifact refers to any artifact that includes an executing 
computer program. This includes software applications running on a general-
purpose computer, programs burned into hardware and embedded in mechanical 
devices, robots, phones, web bots, toys, programs distributed across more than one 
machine, and many other configurations. The Rules apply to, among other types, 
software that is commercial, free, open source, recreational, an academic exercise 
or a research tool. 

As of this writing, the rules are as follows: 

1. The people who design, develop, or deploy a computing artifact are morally 
responsible for that artifact, and for the foreseeable effects of that artifact. 
This responsibility is shared with other people who design, develop, deploy, or 
knowingly use the artifact as part of a sociotechnical system. 
2. The shared responsibility of computing artifacts is not a zero-sum game. The 
responsibility of an individual is not reduced simply because more people 
become involved in designing, developing, deploying or using the artifact. 
Instead, a person’s responsibility includes being answerable for the behaviors 
of the artifact and for the artifact’s effects after deployment, to the degree to 
which these effects are reasonably foreseeable by that person. 
3. People who knowingly use a particular computing artifact are morally responsible 
for that use. 
4. People who knowingly design, develop, deploy, or use a computing artifact 
can do so responsibly only when they make a reasonable effort to take into 
account the sociotechnical systems in which the artifact is embedded. 
5. People who design, develop, deploy, promote, or evaluate a computing artifact 
should not explicitly or implicitly deceive users about the artifact or its foreseeable 
effects, or about the sociotechnical systems in which the artifact is embedded. 
Compared to the codes of ethics discussed earlier, The Rules are few in number 
and quite general in nature. They are intended to apply to a broad spectrum 
of people involved in computer system design and development. The Rules have 
gathered broad support as useful guidelines by academics, practitioners, computer 
scientists, and philosophers from a number of countries [MILL11]. It seems likely 
that The Rules will influence future versions of codes of ethics by computer-related 
professional organizations. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.5 / RECommEndEd REAding 25 
14.5 RECOMMENDED READING 
The following are useful articles on computer crime and cybercrime: [KSHE06], 
[CYMR06], and [TAVA00]. [BRAU01] provides a good introduction to copyrights, 
patents, and trademarks. [GIBB00] provides a concise description of the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act. A useful introduction to Digital Rights Management is 
[LIU03]. [CAMP03] discusses legal aspects of DRM and describes some commercially 
available systems. 

[ISAT02] is an illuminating discussion of the relationship between security 
and privacy with suggestions on technical security measures to protect privacy. 
[GOTT99] provides a detailed discussion of the software engineering code of ethics 
and what it means to individuals in the profession. [CHAP06] is a thoughtful discussion 
of basic ethical issues related to the creation and use of information systems. 
[HARR90] is a detailed discussion of training employees on how to integrate ethics 
into decision making and behavior related to the use of information systems and 
computers. [ANDE93] is a very useful analysis of the practical implications of the 
ACM Code of Ethics, with a number of illustrative case studies. 

ANDE93 Anderson, R., et al.“Using the New ACM Code of Ethics in Decision Making.” 
Communications of the ACM, February 1993. 

BRAU01 Braunfeld,R.,and Wells, T. “Protecting Your Most Valuable Asset:Intellectual 
Property.” IT Pro, March/April 2000. 

CAMP03 Camp, L. “First Principles of Copyright for DRM Design.” IEEE Internet 
Computing, May/June 2003. 

CHAP06 Chapman, C. “Fundamental Ethics in Information Systems.” Proceedings of 
the 39th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2006. 

CYMR06 Team Cymru, “Cybercrime: An Epidemic.” ACM Queue, November 2006. 

GIBB00 Gibbs, J.“The Digital Millennium Copyright Act.” ACM Ubiquity, August 2000. 

GOTT99 Gotterbarn, D. “How the New Software Engineering Code of Ethics Affects 
You.” IEEE Software, November/ December 1999. 

HARR90 Harrington, S., and McCollum, R. “Lessons from Corporate America Applied 
to Training in Computer Ethics.” Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computers 
and the Quality of Life (SIGCAS and SIGCAPH), September 1990. 

ISAT02 Information Science and Technology Study Group. “Security with Privacy,” 
DARPA Briefing on Security and Privacy, Dec. 2002. www.cs.berkeley.edu/~tygar/ 
papers/ISAT-final-briefing.pdf 

KSHE06 Kshetri, N. “The Simple Economics of Cybercrimes.” IEEE Security and 
Privacy, January/February 2006. 

LIU03 Liu, Q.; Safavi-Naini, R.; and Sheppard, N. “Digital Rights Management for 
Content Distribution.” Proceedings, Australasian Information Security Workshop 
2003 (AISW2003), 2003. 

TAVA00 Tavani, H. “ Defining the Boundaries of Computer Crime: Piracy, Break-Ins, 
and Sabotage in Cyberspace.” Computers and Society, September 2000. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.6 REFERENCES 14.6 REFERENCES 
ACM04 The Association for Computing Machinery. DMCA Revisited. June 16, 2004. 
http://usacm.acm.org/ip/category.cfm?cat=0&Intellectual%20Property 

CCPS09 Common Criteria Project Sponsoring Organisations. Common Criteria for 
Information Technology Security Evaluation, Part 2: Security Functional Components. 
CCIMB-2009-07-002, July 2009. 

DOJ00 U.S. Department of Justice. The Electronic Frontier: The Challenge of Unlawful 
Conduct Involving the Use of the Internet. March 2000. http://www.justice.gov/ 
publications/publications_e.html 

HAYE09 Hayes, B.; Judy, H.; and Ritter, J. “Privacy in Cyberspace.” In Bosworth, S.; Kabay, M.; 
and Whyne, E., eds. Computer Security Handbook. New York: Wiley, 2009. 

ISF12 Information Security Forum. The Standard of Good Practice for Information Security. 
2012. www.securityforum.org 

MILL11 Miller, K. “Moral Responsibility for Computing Artifacts: The Rules.” ITPro, May/ 
June 2011. 

PARK88 Parker, D.; Swope, S.; and Baker, B. Ethical Conflicts in Information and Computer 
Science, Technology and Business. Final Report, SRI Project 2609, SRI International 
1988. 

POPP06 Popp, R., and Poindexter, J. “Countering Terrorism through Information and Privacy 
Protection Technologies.” IEEE Security and Privacy, November/December 2006. 

14.7 KEY TERMS, REVIEW QUESTIONS, AND PROBLEMS 
Key Terms 

code of conduct Digital Millennium Copyright intellectual property 
computer crime Act (DMCA) patent 
copyright digital rights management privacy 
cybercrime ethics trademark 
infringement 

Review Questions 

14.1 Describe a classification of computer crime based on the role that the computer plays 
in the criminal activity. 
14.2 Define three types of property. 
14.3 Define three types of intellectual property. 
14.4 What are the basic conditions that must be fulfilled to claim a copyright? 
14.5 What rights does a copyright confer? 
14.6 Briefly describe the Digital Millennium Copyright Act. 
14.7 What is digital rights management? 
14.8 Describe the principal categories of users of digital rights management systems. 
14.9 What are the key principles embodied in the EU Directive on Data Protection? 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.7 / KEy TERms, REviEw QuEsTions, And PRobLEms 27 
14.10 How do the concerns relating to privacy in the Common Criteria differ from the concerns 
usually expressed in official documents, standards, and organizational policies? 
14.11 What functions can a professional code of conduct serve to fulfill? 
Problems 

14.1 For each of the cybercrimes cited in Table 14.1, indicate whether it falls into the category 
of computer as target, computer as storage device, or computer as communications 
tool. In the first case, indicate whether the crime is primarily an attack on data 
integrity, system integrity, data confidentiality, privacy, or availability. 
14.2 Repeat Problem 14.1 for Table 14.2. 
14.3 Review the results of a recent Computer Crime Survey such as the CSI/FBI or 
AusCERT surveys. What changes do they note in the types of crime reported? What 
differences are there between their results and those shown in Table 14.2? 
14.4 An early controversial use of the DCMA was its use in a case in the United States 
brought by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) in 2000 to attempt 
to suppress distribution of the DeCSS program and derivatives. These could be used 
circumvent the copy protection on commercial DVDs. Search for a brief description 
of this case and it’s outcome. Determine whether the MPAA was successful in suppressing 
details of the DeCSS descrambling algorithm. 
14.5 Consider a popular DRM system like Apple’s FairPlay, used to protect audio 
tracks purchased from the iTunes music store. If a person purchases a track from 
the iTunes store by an artist managed by a record company such as EMI, identify 
which company or person fulfils each of the DRM component roles discussed in 
Section 14.2. 
14.6 Table 14.3 lists the privacy guidelines issued by the Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD). Compare these guidelines to the categories 
the EU adopted in the Directive on Data Protection. 
14.7 Many countries now require organizations that collect personal information to publish 
a privacy policy detailing how they will handle and use such information. Obtain 
a copy of the privacy policy for an organization to which you have provided your 
personal details. Compare this policy with the lists of principles given in Section 14.3. 
Does this policy address all of these principles? 
14.8 A management briefing lists the following as the top five actions that to improve privacy. 
Compare these recommendations to the Information Privacy Standard of Good 
Practice in Appendix H.4. Comment on the differences. 
1. Show visible and consistent management support. 
2. Establish privacy responsibilities. Privacy requirements need to be incorporated 
into any position that handles personally identifiable information (PII). 
3. Incorporate privacy and security into the systems and application life cycle. 
This includes a formal privacy impact assessment. 
4. Provide continuous and effective awareness and training. 
5. Encrypt moveable PII. This includes transmission as well as mobile devices. 
14.9 Assume you are a midlevel systems administrator for one section of a larger organization. 
You try to encourage your users to have good password policies and you 
regularly run password-cracking tools to check that those in use are not guessable. 
You have become aware of a burst of hacker password-cracking activity recently. 
In a burst of enthusiasm you transfer the password files from a number of other 
sections of the organization and attempt to crack them. To your horror, you find that 
in one section for which you used to work (but now have rather strained relationships 
with), something like 40% of the passwords are guessable (including that of the Vice-
President of the section, whose password is “pre$ident”!). You quietly sound out a 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

28 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

Table 14.3 OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows of 
Information 

Collection limitation 
There should be limits to the collection of personal data and any such data should be obtained by 
lawful and fair means and, where appropriate, with the knowledge or consent of the data subject. 
Data quality 
Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for which they are to be used and to the extent 
necessary for those purposes, should be accurate, complete and kept up-to-date. 
Purpose specification 
The purposes for which personal data are collected should be specified not later than at the time of 
data collection and the subsequent use limited to the fulfillment of those purposes or such others 
as are not incompatible with those purposes and as are specified on each occasion of change of 
purpose. 
Use limitation 
Personal data should not be disclosed, made available or otherwise used for purposes other than 
those specified in accordance with the preceding principle, except with the consent of the data 
subject or by the authority of law. 
Security safeguards 
Personal data should be protected by reasonable security safeguards against such risks as loss or 
unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification or disclosure of data. 
Openness 
There should be a general policy of openness about developments, practices and policies with 
respect to personal data. Means should be readily available of establishing the existence and nature 
of personal data, and the main purposes of their use, as well as the identity and usual residence of 
the data controller. 
Individual participation 
An individual should have the right: 
a. to obtain from a data controller, or otherwise, confirmation of whether or not the data controller 
has data relating to him. 
b. to have communicated to him, data relating to him within a reasonable time; at a charge, if any, 
that is not excessive; in a reasonable manner; and in a form that is readily intelligible to him; 
c. to be given reasons if a request made under subparagraphs(a) and (b) is denied, and to be able 
to challenge such denial; and 
d. to challenge data relating to him and, if the challenge is successful to have the data erased, 
rectified, completed or amended. 
Accountability 
A data controller should be accountable for complying with measures which give effect to the 
principles stated above. 

few former colleagues and drop hints in the hope things might improve. A couple of 
weeks later you again transfer the password file over to analyze in the hope things 
have improved. They haven’t. Unfortunately, this time one of your colleagues notices 
what you are doing. Being a rather “by the book” person, he notifies senior management, 
and that evening you find yourself being arrested on a charge of hacking and 
thrown out of a job. Did you do anything wrong? Briefly indicate what arguments 
you might use to defend your actions, Make reference to the Professional Codes of 
Conduct shown in Figures 14.6 through 14.8. 

14.10 Section 14.4 stated that the three ethical codes illustrated in this chapter (ACM, 
IEEE, AITP) share the common themes of dignity and worth of people; personal 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14A / infoRmATion PRivACy 29 

integrity; responsibility for work; confidentiality of information; public safety, health, 
and welfare; participation in professional societies; and knowledge about technology 
related to social power. Construct a table that shows for each theme and for each 
code, the relevant clause or clauses in the code that address the theme. 

14.11 This book’s Premium Content site includes a copy of the ACM Code of Professional 
Conduct from 1982. Compare this Code with the 1997 ACM Code of Ethics and 
Professional Conduct (Figure 14.6). 
a. Are there any elements in the 1982 Code not found in the 1997 Code? Propose 
a rationale for excluding these. 
b. Are there any elements in the 1997 Code not found in the 1982 Code? Propose a 
rationale for adding these. 
14.12 This book’s Premium Content site includes a copy of the IEEE Code Ethics from 
1979. Compare this Code with the 2006 IEEE Code of Ethics (Figure 14.7). 
a. Are there any elements in the 1979 Code not found in the 2006 Code? Propose 
a rationale for excluding these. 
b. Are there any elements in the 2006 Code not found in the 1979 Code? Propose a 
rationale for adding these. 
14.13 This book’s Premium Content site includes a copy of the 1999 Software Engineering 
Code of Ethics and Professional Practice (Version 5.2) as recommended by an ACM/ 
IEEE-CS Joint Task Force. Compare this Code each of the three codes reproduced 
in this chapter (Figures 14.6 through 14.8). Comment in each case on the differences. 
14A INFORMATION PRIVACY 
Principle: Responsibility for managing information privacy 
should be established and security controls for handling 
personally identifiable information (i.e. information that 
can be used to identify an individual person) applied. 

Objective: To prevent information about individuals being 
used in an inappropriate manner, and ensure compliance with 
legal and regulatory requirements for information privacy. 

1. A high-level working group, committee or equivalent body should be established 
to be responsible for managing information privacy issues, and an 
individual appointed to co-ordinate information privacy activity (e.g. a Chief 
Privacy Officer, Data Protection Manager or equivalent). 
2. The high-level working group should be aware of: 
a. privacy-related legislation and regulation with which the organisation needs 
to comply 
b. the location(s) of personally identifiable information held about individuals 
(e.g. application and database servers, computing devices, consumer devices 
and portable storage devices) 
c. how and when personally identifiable information (i.e. information that can 
be used to identify an individual person) is used. 
3. An information privacy programme should be established which includes: 
a. identifying individuals (or a group of individuals) within the organisation 
who are responsible for implementing the programme 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

30 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

b. establishing an awareness programme to make staff and external parties (e.g. 
customers, clients and suppliers) aware of the importance of information 
privacy (or integrating the topic into existing awareness campaigns) 
c. performing privacy assessments against critical business processes and critical 
business applications across the organisation to identify privacy-related 
risks 
d. undertaking privacy audits to determine the level of compliance with relevant 
legislation, regulation and internal policies. 
4. There should be a documented information privacy policy that covers the: 
a. acceptable use of personally identifiable information (i.e. information that 
can be used to identify an individual person) 
b. rights of individuals about whom personally identifiable information is held 
c. legal and regulatory requirements for privacy 
d. need for privacy assessments, awareness and compliance programmes 
e. technical controls (including privacy enhancing technologies (PETs)). 
5. The information privacy policy should require that where personally identifiable 
information is stored, processed or transmitted, there should be a process 
to ensure that it is: 
a. classified and labelled (e.g. as personal or personally identifiable information 
(PII)) 
b. adequate, relevant and not excessive for the purposes for which it is collected 
c. accurate (i.e. recorded correctly and kept up-to-date) 
d. kept confidential (i.e. protected against unauthorised disclosure) 
e. processed fairly and legally, and used only for specified, explicit and legitimate 
purposes 
f. held in a format that permits identification of individuals for no longer than 
is necessary 
g. only provided to external parties that can demonstrate compliance with legal 
and regulatory requirements for handling personally identifiable information 
h. retrievable in the event of a legitimate request for access (e.g. a subject 
access request under UK Data Protection law or under the EU Directive 
for Data Protection). 
6. The information privacy policy should be aligned with other information 
security-related policies, such as those covering document retention and cloud 
computing (e.g. as part of an information security policy framework). 
7. Individuals about whom personally identifiable information is held (e.g. the 
‘data subject’ according to the EU Directive for Data Protection) should: 
a. have their approval sought before this information is collected, processed, 
stored or disclosed to external parties 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14A / infoRmATion PRivACy 31 

b. be informed of who is collecting this information, how this information will 
be used, allowed to check its accuracy and be able to have their records corrected 
or removed 
c. have the ability to opt-out of the collection and disclosure of this information 
(e.g. to external parties) 
d. have a method available to them to hold the organisation accountable for 
following information privacy principles (i.e. those common to the majority 
of privacy-related legislation). 
8. Personally identifiable information should be: 
a. handled in accordance with relevant legislation (e.g. the EU Directive for 
Data Protection and the US Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA)) 
b. protected throughout its lifecycle (i.e. through creation, processing, storage, 
transmission and destruction). 
9. Technical controls (often referred to as privacy enhancing technologies 
(PETs)) should be used to help protect privacy-related information, including: 
a. encryption (to prevent unauthorised disclosure during storage and transmission) 
and effective encryption key management (e.g. when handling, storing 
and archiving keys) 
b. data masking (also known as data obfuscation, data de-identification, data 
depersonalisation, data scrubbing, and data scrambling), which involves 
concealing parts of information (e.g. names, addresses, social security numbers 
and credit card numbers) when being stored or transmitted 
c. tokenisation, which substitutes valid information (e.g. database fields, 
records) with random information and provides authorised access to this 
information via the use of tokens 
d. protecting privacy-related metadata (e.g. document attributes or descriptive 
information that may contain personal information such as the name of the 
person who last updated a file). 
10. A method of dealing with data privacy breaches should be established, which 
includes: 
a. identifying when a data privacy breach occurs (typically by monitoring event 
logs or using intrusion detection and information leakage protection tools) 
b. responding to a data privacy breach (typically as part of the organisation’s 
information security incident management process) 
c. notifying relevant authorities of a security breach (e.g. as required by data 
breach notification laws, such as the California Security Breach Notification 
Law (SB 1386) or the EU Directive on Privacy and Electronic Communications 
2009). 
© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

