THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT FOR THE VIDEO

How do firewalls help protect organisational networks

PARTICIPANTS

Dr Vaughan Shanks, Chief Executive Officer Cydarm Technologies

Sean Duca, Vice President Regional Chief Security Officer Asia Pacific & Japan Palo Alto Networks

[BEGINNING OF RECORDED MATERIAL]

[RMIT University logo animation]

Vaughan Shanks: Defence in depth is the idea that we have controls operating at many layers throughout an 
organisation. And what this means is that, not only at the perimeter, but if an attacker is able 
to get inside the perimeter-- perhaps their even an insider threat, an employee of a company, 
for example-- then they're still restricted in what resources they can access from a particular 
vantage point in the network.

Sean Duca: If an attacker wanted to come in, he would breach a system or parts of your Defence that's 
actually in place, to actually get in. And if you've actually got a layered approach to say, well, if 
this part can't catch it, something else is going to catch it here, that's effectively what Defence 
in depth is all about.

Vaughan Shanks: Now, you can have firewalls on the perimeter of an organisation. And that's very common for 
stopping unwanted internet traffic from coming in, also for stopping unwanted connections 
from going out, if an attacker is able to connect in and is seeking to exfiltrate data. You can 
also have firewalls within an organisation to segregate networks from each other. And it is 
very important to ensure-- and especially in the modern day, with this idea of zero trust, that 
we segregate networks, so that traffic from one network can't simply flow into a network 
where it's not supposed to be.

Sean Duca: IPsec is a protocol that's actually used as part of a VPN, so virtual private network. So if you-- 
an organisation, think of the concept of a headquarters, a branch office, or even branch office 
to branch office. It's basically creating a secure tunnel or an encrypted tunnel between those 
organisations or those particular offices.

So if you think about it today, many people have actually got an internet connection. You 
probably have a firewall connection sitting in front of those ones. You're effectively creating 
just a secure connection between all of those different systems, all those different firewalls, 
rather than simply just saying, it's "out in the open" internet and anyone and everyone could 
actually see the traffic and the packets that are actually going between those sites.

Vaughan Shanks: So firewalls are useful for controlling traffic flow between networks, so enabling traffic that is 
useful to flow between networks and even, sometimes, guaranteeing quality of service on 


particular types of traffic. What they can't do, though, is they can't look inside an endpoint. So 
whether it be a workstation or a server, if you've got processes running on a system, the 
firewall has nothing to do with that. It can only monitor the flow of traffic and prevent 
unwanted traffic.

Sean Duca: The weaknesses of a packet-filtering firewall, in a sense, really are you're effectively allowing-- 
let's just say, a rule was set, from this machine, anything that's HTTP, allow that traffic to go 
through to that particular site. So you're basically saying this is the-- the protocol is TCP, so the 
TCP/IP protocol that's used in the web. You basically say HTTP traffic-- you're saying that's on 
port 80 and it's simply going through. The weaknesses they actually come out of that is, well, I 
can actually send malicious traffic through that port, and you've allowed that port, that 
protocol to actually simply open up.

The use of firewalls have really changed. In essence, now, where you've got a concept that 
started many, many years ago called next-generation firewall-- and that was really around the 
fact of understanding what's the application that's actually being used. Who's the user and the 
topic context?

So, for myself, I can create a rule to say, Sean is allowed to access these particular 25 
applications. He can't use those other applications that are actually out there. So irrespective 
of the network, the device, anything that I'm actually using, I'm simply only allowed to use 
those particular applications.

Vaughan Shanks:There's been a lot of talk about next-generation firewalls or firewalls that are equipped with 
machine learning capabilities. So what this means is, instead of applying rigid rules about 
where traffic is allowed to flow, they can actually apply some level of inspection on packets 
and make determinations that are more sophisticated and nuanced, then, and could be even 
comparing what's a normal flow against something that looks irregular.

[RMIT University logo animation]

[END OF RECORDED MATERIAL]


