THIS IS A TRANSCRIPT FOR THE VIDEO

What are the key issues in cyber-crime

PARTICIPANTS

Dr Vaughan Shanks, Chief Executive Officer Cydarm Technologies

Sean Duca, Vice President Regional Chief Security Officer Asia Pacific & Japan Palo Alto Networks

Megan Storrar, Chief Executive Officer Event Horizon Security, INC

[BEGINNING OF RECORDED MATERIAL]

[RMIT University logo animation]

Vaughan Shanks: Some common types of cyber crime are ransomware-- and you'll read about this a lot. Usually, 
once an organisation is ransomed, everyone knows about it, because they will stop 
functioning until they solve the problem. Another one is business email compromise. This 
often goes on unknown by the public because the victims are too ashamed to admit they were 
swindled.

Sean Duca: So you actually think that you're dealing with a legitimate provider or I could have tricked you 
to say hey, you provide me with this information and I'll give you a $50 gift card. It's all about 
how to actually try and take information from you. And that's actually used for identity theft.

The other one would be some sort of financial fraud or financial information. And this is where 
I'm tricking you into providing maybe credit card information, the CVV that's actually on your 
credit card. And then I'll actually use that to do some sort of nefarious activity or for my own 
sort of gains. The other one would really be just stealing information and then selling that on 
to the dark web.

Megan Storrar: At its most basic, at its most tragic, I will say, is it's a trillion-dollar economy. It's expected to be 
valued somewhere near $4 trillion by halfway through next year.

Sean Duca: Computer crimes are proved in a court of law, firstly, when there actually is a law that's 
actually there. Globally, I think we've got about 20 countries around the world-- so about 150 
odd countries, 20 of them have actually got any type of law that relates to computer crimes. 
So again, when you start to think about that problem of law enforcement, if there's no laws in 
place, it makes it a little bit harder for law enforcement to try and sort of track it down.

Vaughan Shanks: Law enforcement agencies are traditionally very good at solving crimes in the physical world. 
And I think it's only a relatively recent, maybe last 10 years, thing that they have a growing 
number of people who understand crime in the electronic world. A big challenge they face is 
the prevalence of end-to-end encryption. So this is happening everywhere. It's increasingly 
hard to intercept data that's related to the commission of a crime, and very hard even, 
sometimes, to find out who's doing the communicating.


Megan Storrar: What we normally find is, a person acting with malicious intent will bounce themselves around 
the world. They'll use a DNS relay, something like that. And the first IP you get to is not always 
the IP that you're working with. So a way to look at this is grab the headers of any email that 
you receive externally and look at all of the IP it's gone through.

Vaughan Shanks:So there's a number of ethical considerations you have to think about when prosecuting cyber 
crimes or investigating them. One is that you need to make sure that you know who the 
offender is. Because it's cyberspace and it's being done over the internet, it's very easy for an 
attacker to do what's called a false flag operation, to pretend that they are someone who 
they're not.

Megan Storrar: So one of the impacts-- precursors to arresting an individual for malicious cyber attacks-- and 
you have legislation in place, it's clear the person has broken the law, they've taken the IP 
back, they have all of the forensic evidence, you still have to put an individual behind the 
keyboard. How do you do that in a home environment when you've got five people that live in 
the household?

Vaughan Shanks: The other issue is that even if you can attribute a crime to a threat actor, they often are 
coming at you from a foreign country and it'll be out of your jurisdiction. And they know what 
jurisdiction has extradition treaties, for example. And they will know to stay away from 
jurisdictions where your law enforcement can actually reach them.

Sean Duca: When you actually do have one cyber criminal that casts their net as far and as wide as they 
possibly can, taking one person down actually is a pretty big thing. So it's not simply a case of, 
well, only a few people have actually been convicted over the years. It's something that law 
enforcement is getting better and better at as the years come by, and in turn, a lot of the laws 
will continue to evolve and change to deal with computer crime laws.

Vaughan Shanks: Deterring cyber crime is arguably best done by imposing costs upon the attacker. So one cost 
is, for example, once you've correctly attributed a cyber crime and identified the suspect, you 
put out a warrant through something like Interpol and you make sure that if they ever set foot 
in a country that has an extradition treaty, they'll be very quickly arrested and brought to 
justice.

Sean DucaThe more that we can have public-private partnerships, the more that we can have threat 
information sharing, the more that we can even start to think about how do we cyber secured 
all of nation from petty cyber crime, so to speak? There's been a lot of discussion and talk 
around concepts such as clean pipes, which is, every ISP comes together and says, why don't 
we actually provide an all of nation protection to some of the basic cyber crime that's actually 
out there?

Megan StorrarI have to convince the industry to go from preventative security solutions to offensive cyber 
security solutions. And some of you who do know something about this subject will be leaning 
forward going, no, you can't do that. The law doesn't allow it. The laws may need to be 
changed.

[RMIT University logo animation]


[END OF RECORDED MATERIAL]


