6 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

but the range of behavioral characteristics is wide. Further, there exist no cybercriminal 
databases that can point investigators to likely suspects. 

The success of cybercriminals, and the relative lack of success of law enforcement, 
influences the behavior of cybercrime victims. As with law enforcement, 
many organizations that may be the target of attack have not invested sufficiently 
in technical, physical, and human-factor resources to prevent attacks. Reporting 
rates tend to be low because of a lack of confidence in law enforcement, a concern 
about corporate reputation, and a concern about civil liability. The low reporting 
rates and the reluctance to work with law enforcement on the part of victims feeds 
into the handicaps under which law enforcement works, completing the vicious 
cycle. 

Working with Law Enforcement 

Executive management and security administrators need to look upon law enforcement 
as another resource and tool, alongside technical, physical, and human-factor 
resources. The successful use of law enforcement depends much more on people 
skills than technical skills. Management needs to understand the criminal investigation 
process, the inputs that investigators need, and the ways in which the victim can 
contribute positively to the investigation. 

14.2 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
The U.S. legal system, and legal systems generally, distinguish three primary types 
of property: 

■■ Real property: Land and things permanently attached to the land, such as 
trees, buildings, and stationary mobile homes. 

■■ Personal property: Personal effects, moveable property and goods, such as cars, 
bank accounts, wages, securities, a small business, furniture, insurance policies, 
jewelry, patents, pets, and season baseball tickets. 

■■ Intellectual property: Any intangible asset that consists of human knowledge 
and ideas. Examples include software, data, novels, sound recordings, the 
design of a new type of mousetrap, or a cure for a disease. 

This section focuses on the computer security aspects of intellectual property. 

Types of Intellectual Property 

There are three main types of intellectual property for which legal protection is 
available: copyrights, trademarks, and patents. The legal protection is against 
infringement, which is the invasion of the rights secured by copyrights, trademarks, 
and patents. The right to seek civil recourse against anyone infringing his or her 
property is granted to the IP owner. Depending upon the type of IP, infringement 
may vary (Figure 14.1). 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 7 
Patents 
Unauthorized 
making, 
using or selling 
Trademarks 
Unauthorized use or 
colorable imitation 
Copyrights 
Unauthorized use 
Figure 14.1 Intellectual Property Infringement 

Copyrights Copyright law protects the tangible or fixed expression of an idea, not 
the idea itself. A creator can claim copyright, and file for the copyright at a national 
government copyright office, if the following conditions are fulfilled:4 

■■ The proposed work is original. 

■■ The creator has put this original idea into a concrete form, such as hard copy 
(paper), software, or multimedia form. 

Examples of items that may be copyrighted include the following [BRAU01]: 

■■ Literary works: Novels, nonfiction prose, poetry, newspaper articles and newspapers, 
magazine articles and magazines, catalogs, brochures, ads (text), and 
compilations such as business directories 

■■ Musical works: Songs, advertising jingles, and instrumentals 

■■ Dramatic works: Plays, operas, and skits 

■■ Pantomimes and choreographic works: Ballets, modern dance, jazz dance, and 
mime works 

■■ Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works: Photographs, posters, maps, paintings, 
drawings, graphic art, display ads, cartoon strips and cartoon characters, stuffed 
animals, statues, paintings, and works of fine art 

■■ Motion pictures and other audiovisual works: Movies, documentaries, travelogues, 
training films and videos, television shows, television ads, and interactive 
multimedia works 

4Copyright is automatically assigned to newly created works in countries that subscribe to the Berne 
convention, which encompasses the vast majority of nations. Some countries, such as the United States, 
provide additional legal protection if the work is registered. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

8 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Sound recordings: Recordings of music, sound, or words 
■■ Architectural works: Building designs, whether in the form of architectural 
plans, drawings, or the constructed building itself 
■■ Software-related works: Computer software, software documentation and 
manuals, training manuals, and other manuals 
The copyright owner has the following exclusive rights, protected against 

infringement: 
■■ Reproduction right: Lets the owner make copies of a work 
■■ Modification right: Also known as the derivative-works right, concerns modi


fying a work to create a new or derivative work 
■■ Distribution right: Lets the owner publicly sell, rent, lease, or lend copies of 

the work 
■■ Public-performance right: Applies mainly to live performances 
■■ Public-display right: Lets the owner publicly show a copy of the work directly 

or by means of a film, slide, or television image 

patents A patent for an invention is the grant of a property right to the inventor. 
The right conferred by the patent grant is, in the language of the U.S. statute and 
of the grant itself, “the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, 
or selling” the invention in the United States or “importing” the invention into the 
United States. Similar wording appears in the statutes of other nations. There are 
three types of patents: 

■■ Utility patents: May be granted to anyone who invents or discovers any new 
and useful process, machine, article of manufacture, or composition of matter, 
or any new and useful improvement thereof; 

■■ Design patents: May be granted to anyone who invents a new, original, and 
ornamental design for an article of manufacture; and 
■■ Plant patents: May be granted to anyone who invents or discovers and asexually 
reproduces any distinct and new variety of plant. 

An example of a patent from the computer security realm is the RSA public-
key cryptosystem. From the time it was granted in 1983 until the patent expired in 
2000, the patent holder, RSA Security, was entitled to receive a fee for each implementation 
of RSA. 

trademarks A trademark is a word, name, symbol, or device that is used in trade 
with goods to indicate the source of the goods and to distinguish them from the 
goods of others. A servicemark is the same as a trademark except that it identifies 
and distinguishes the source of a service rather than a product. The terms trademark 
and mark are commonly used to refer to both trademarks and servicemarks. 
Trademark rights may be used to prevent others from using a confusingly similar 
mark, but not to prevent others from making the same goods or from selling the 
same goods or services under a clearly different mark. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 9 
Intellectual Property Relevant to Network and Computer 
Security 

A number of forms of intellectual property are relevant in the context of network 
and computer security. Here we mention some of the most prominent: 

■■ Software: This includes programs produced by vendors of commercial software 
(e.g., operating systems, utility programs, applications) as well as shareware, 
proprietary software created by an organization for internal use, and 
software produced by individuals. For all such software, copyright protection 
is available if desired. In some cases, a patent protection may also be 
appropriate. 

■■ Databases: A database may consist of data that is collected and organized in 
such a fashion that it has potential commercial value. An example is an economic 
forecasting database. Such databases may be protected by copyright. 

■■ Digital content: This category includes audio files, video files, multimedia, 
courseware, Web site content, and any other original digital work that can be 
presented in some fashion using computers or other digital devices. 

■■ Algorithms: An example of a patentable algorithm, previously cited, is the 
RSA public-key cryptosystem. 

Digital Millennium Copyright Act 

The U.S. Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) has had a profound effect 
on the protection of digital content rights in both the United States and worldwide. 
The DMCA, signed into law in 1998, is designed to implement World Intellectual 
Property Organization (WIPO) treaties, signed in 1996. In essence, DMCA 
strengthens the protection of copyrighted materials in digital format. 

The DMCA encourages copyright owners to use technological measures 
to protect copyrighted works. These measures fall into two categories: measures 
that prevent access to the work and measures that prevent copying of the work. 
Further, the law prohibits attempts to bypass such measures. Specifically, the 
law states that “no person shall circumvent a technological measure that effectively 
controls access to a work protected under this title.” Among other effects 
of this clause, it prohibits almost all unauthorized decryption of content. The 
law further prohibits the manufacture, release, or sale of products, services, and 
devices that can crack encryption designed to thwart either access to or copying 
of material unauthorized by the copyright holder. Both criminal and civil penalties 
apply to attempts to circumvent technological measures and to assist in such 
circumvention. 

Certain actions are exempted from the provisions of the DMCA and other 
copyright laws, including the following: 

■■ Fair use: This concept is not tightly defined. It is intended to permit others to 
perform, show, quote, copy, and otherwise distribute portions of the work for 
certain purposes. These purposes include review, comment, and discussion of 
copyrighted works. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

10 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Reverse engineering: Reverse engineering of a software product is allowed if 
the user has the right to use a copy of the program and if the purpose of the 
reverse engineering is not to duplicate the functionality of the program but 
rather to achieve interoperability. 

■■ Encryption research: “Good faith” encryption research is allowed. In essence, 
this exemption allows decryption attempts to advance the development of 
encryption technology. 

■■ Security testing: This is the access of a computer or network for the good faith 
testing, investigating, or correcting a security flaw or vulnerability, with the 
authorization of the owner or operator. 

■■ Personal privacy: It is generally permitted to bypass technological measures if 
that is the only reasonable way to prevent the access to result in the revealing 
or recording of personally identifying information. 

Despite the exemptions built into the Act, there is considerable concern, 
especially in the research and academic communities, that the act inhibits legitimate 
security and encryption research. These parties feel that DMCA stifles innovation 
and academic freedom and is a threat to open source software development 
[ACM04]. 

Digital Rights Management 

Digital Rights Management (DRM) refers to systems and procedures that ensure 
that holders of digital rights are clearly identified and receive the stipulated payment 
for their works. The systems and procedures may also impose further restrictions 
on the use of digital objects, such as inhibiting printing or prohibiting further 
distribution. 

There is no single DRM standard or architecture. DRM encompasses a variety 
of approaches to intellectual property management and enforcement by providing 
secure and trusted automated services to control the distribution and use of 
content. In general, the objective is to provide mechanisms for the complete content 
management life cycle (creation, subsequent contribution by others, access, 
distribution, use), including the management of rights information associated with 
the content. 

DRM systems should meet the following objectives: 

1. Provide persistent content protection against unauthorized access to the digital 
content, limiting access to only those with the proper authorization. 
2. Support a variety of digital content types (e.g., music files, video streams, digital 
books, images). 
3. Support content use on a variety of platforms, (e.g., PCs, PDAs, iPods, mobile 
phones). 
4. Support content distribution on a variety of media, including CD-ROMs, 
DVDs, and flash memory. 
Figure 14.2, based on [LIU03], illustrates a typical DRM model in terms of the 
principal users of DRM systems: 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.2 / inTELLECTuAL PRoPERTy 11 
Protectedcontent 
Paying 
royalty fees 
Usagerules 
Digitallicense 
Protectedcontent 
Requiringlicense and paying 
Information ow 
Paying distribution 
Money ow 
Figure 14.2 DRM Components 

■■ Content provider: Holds the digital rights of the content and wants to protect 
these rights. Examples are a music record label and a movie studio. 

■■ Distributor: Provides distribution channels, such as an online shop or a Web 
retailer. For example, an online distributor receives the digital content from 
the content provider and creates a Web catalog presenting the content and 
rights metadata for the content promotion. 

■■ Consumer: Uses the system to access the digital content by retrieving downloadable 
or streaming content through the distribution channel and then paying 
for the digital license. The player/viewer application used by the consumer 
takes charge of initiating license request to the clearinghouse and enforcing 
the content usage rights. 

■■ Clearinghouse: Handles the financial transaction for issuing the digital license 
to the consumer and pays royalty fees to the content provider and distribution 
fees to the distributor accordingly. The clearinghouse is also responsible for 
logging license consumptions for every consumer. 

In this model, the distributor need not enforce the access rights. Instead, the 
content provider protects the content in such a way (typically encryption) that the 
consumer must purchase a digital license and access capability from the clearinghouse. 
The clearinghouse consults usage rules provided by the content provider 
to determine what access is permitted and the fee for a particular type of access. 
Having collected the fee, the clearinghouse credits the content provider and distributor 
appropriately. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

12 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

Figure 14.3 shows a generic system architecture to support DRM functionality. 
The system is access by parties in three roles. Rights holders are the content 
providers, who either created the content or have acquired rights to the content. 
Service providers include distributors and clearinghouses. Consumers are those 
who purchase the right to access to content for specific uses. There is system interface 
to the services provided by the DRM system: 

■■ Identity management: Mechanisms to uniquely identify entities, such as parties 
and content 
■■ Content management: Processes and functions needed to manage the content 
lifestyle 
■■ Rights management: Processes and functions needed to manage rights, rights 
holders, and associated requirements 

Below these management modules are a set of common functions. The 
security/encryption module provides functions to encrypt content and to sign license 
agreements. The identity management service makes use of the authentication and 
authorization functions to identify all parties in the relationship. Using these functions, 
the identity management service includes the following: 

■■ Allocation of unique party identifiers 
■■ User profile and preferences 
■■ User’s device management 
■■ Public-key management 

ROLESSERVICESFUNCTIONS
Figure 14.3 DRM System Architecutre 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14.3 / PRivACy 13 
Billing/payments functions deal with the collection of usage fees from consumers 
and the distribution of payments to rights holders and distributors. Delivery 
functions deal with the delivery of content to consumers. 

14.3 PRIVACY 
An issue with considerable overlap with computer security is that of privacy. On 
the one hand, the scale and interconnectedness of personal information collected 
and stored in information systems has increased dramatically, motivated by law 
enforcement, national security, and economic incentives. The last mentioned has 
been perhaps the main driving force. In a global information economy, it is likely 
that the most economically valuable electronic asset is aggregations of information 
on individuals [HAYE09]. On the other hand, individuals have become increasingly 
aware of the extent to which government agencies, businesses, and even Internet 
users have access to their personal information and private details about their lives 
and activities. 

Concerns about the extent to which personal privacy has been and may be 
compromised have led to a variety of legal and technical approaches to reinforcing 
privacy rights. 

Privacy Law and Regulation 

A number of international organizations and national governments have introduced 
laws and regulations intended to protect individual privacy. We look at two 
such initiatives in this subsection. 

european union data proteCtion direCtive In 1998, the EU adopted the 
Directive on Data Protection to both (1) ensure that member states protected fundamental 
privacy rights when processing personal information, and (2) prevent 
member states from restricting the free flow of personal information within the EU. 
The Directive is not itself a law, but requires member states to enact laws encompassing 
its terms. The Directive is organized around the following principles of personal 
information use: 

■■ Notice: Organizations must notify individuals what personal information they 
are collecting, the uses of that information, and what choices the individual 
may have. 

■■ Consent: Individuals must be able to choose whether and how their personal 
information is used by, or disclosed to, third parties. They have the right not to 
have any sensitive information collected or used without express permission, 
including race, religion, health, union membership, beliefs, and sex life. 

■■ Consistency: Organizations may use personal information only in accordance 
with the terms of the notice given the data subject and any choices with respect 
to its use exercised by the subject. 

■■ Access: Individuals must have the right and ability to access their information 
and correct, modify, or delete any portion of it. 

© 2017 Pearson Education, Inc., Hoboken, NJ. All rights reserved.

14 CHAPTER 14 / LEgAL And ETHiCAL AsPECTs 

■■ Security: Organizations must provide adequate security, using technical and 
other means, to protect the integrity and confidentiality of personal information. 

■■ Onward transfer: Third parties receiving personal information must provide 
the same level of privacy protection as the organization from whom the information 
is obtained. 

■■ Enforcement: The Directive grants a private right of action to data subjects 
when organizations do not follow the law. In addition, each EU member has 
a regulatory enforcement agency concerned with privacy rights enforcement. 

united states privaCy initiatives The first comprehensive privacy legislation 
adopted in the United States was the Privacy Act of 1974, which dealt with personal 
information collected and used by federal agencies. The Act is intended to 

1. Permit individuals to determine what records pertaining to them are collected, 
maintained, used, or disseminated. 
2. Permit individuals to forbid records obtained for one purpose to be used for 
another purpose without consent. 
3. Permit individuals to obtain access to records pertaining to them and to correct 
and amend such records as appropriate. 
4. Ensure that agencies collect, maintain, and use personal information in a manner 
that ensures that the information is current, adequate, relevant, and not 
excessive for its intended use. 
5. Create a private right of action for individuals whose personal information is 
not used in accordance with the Act. 
As with all privacy laws and regulations, there are exceptions and conditions 

attached to this Act, such as criminal investigations, national security concerns, and 

conflicts between competing individual rights of privacy. 

While the 1974 Privacy Act covers government records, a number of other 

U.S. laws have been enacted that cover other areas, including the following: 
■■ Banking and financial records: Personal banking information is protected 
in certain ways by a number of laws, including the recent Financial Services 
Modernization Act. 

■■ Credit reports: The Fair Credit Reporting Act confers certain rights on individuals 
and obligations on credit reporting agencies. 

■■ Medical and health insurance records: A variety of laws have been in place for 
decades dealing with medical records privacy.The Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPPA) created significant new rights for patients to 
protect and access their own health information. 

■■ Children’s privacy: The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act places restrictions 
on online organizations in the collection of data from children under the 
age of 13. 

■■ Electronic communications: The Electronic Communications Privacy Act generally 
prohibits unauthorized and intentional interception of wire an electronic 
communications during the transmission phase and unauthorized accessing of 
electronically stored wire and electronic communications. 

