188 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
Virtually all businesses, most government agencies, and many individuals now have 
Web sites. The number of individuals and companies with Internet access is expanding 
rapidly and all of these have graphical Web browsers. As a result, businesses are enthusiastic 
about setting up facilities on the Web for electronic commerce. But the reality 
is that the Internet and the Web are extremely vulnerable to compromises of various 
sorts. As businesses wake up to this reality, the demand for secure Web services grows. 
The topic of Web security is a broad one and can easily fill a book. In this chapter, 
we begin with a discussion of the general requirements for Web security and then 
focus on three standardized schemes that are becoming increasingly important as part 
of Web commerce and that focus on security at the transport layer: SSL/TLS, HTTPS, 
and SSH. 
6.1 Web Security Considerations 
The World Wide Web is fundamentally a client/server application running over the 
Internet and TCP/IP intranets. As such, the security tools and approaches discussed 
so far in this book are relevant to the issue of Web security. However, the following 
characteristics of Web usage suggest the need for tailored security tools: 
■■ Although Web browsers are very easy to use, Web servers are relatively easy 
to configure and manage, and Web content is increasingly easy to develop, the 
underlying software is extraordinarily complex. This complex software may 
hide many potential security flaws. The short history of the Web is filled with 
examples of new and upgraded systems, properly installed, that are vulnerable 
to a variety of security attacks. 
■■ A Web server can be exploited as a launching pad into the corporation’s or 
agency’s entire computer complex. Once the Web server is subverted, an 
attacker may be able to gain access to data and systems not part of the Web 
itself but connected to the server at the local site. 
Learning Objectives 
After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 
◆ ◆ Summarize Web security threats and Web traffic security approaches. 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of Transport Layer Security (TLS). 
◆ ◆ Understand the differences between Secure Sockets Layer and Transport 
Layer Security. 
◆ ◆ Compare the pseudorandom function used in Transport Layer Security 
with those discussed earlier in the book. 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of HTTPS (HTTP over SSL). 
◆ ◆ Present an overview of Secure Shell (SSH). 

6.1 / Web Security Considerations 189 
■■ Casual and untrained (in security matters) users are common clients for Webbased 
services. Such users are not necessarily aware of the security risks that 
exist and do not have the tools or knowledge to take effective countermeasures. 
Web Security Threats 
Table 6.1 provides a summary of the types of security threats faced when using the 
Web. One way to group these threats is in terms of passive and active attacks. Passive 
attacks include eavesdropping on network traffic between browser and server and 
gaining access to information on a Web site that is supposed to be restricted. Active 
attacks include impersonating another user, altering messages in transit between 
client and server, and altering information on a Web site. 
Another way to classify Web security threats is in terms of the location of the 
threat: Web server, Web browser, and network traffic between browser and server. 
Issues of server and browser security fall into the category of computer system security; 
Part Six of this book addresses the issue of system security in general but is also 
applicable to Web system security. Issues of traffic security fall into the category of 
network security and are addressed in this chapter. 
Web Traffic Security Approaches 
A number of approaches to providing Web security are possible. The various 
approaches that have been considered are similar in the services they provide and, 
to some extent, in the mechanisms that they use, but they differ with respect to their 
scope of applicability and their relative location within the TCP/IP protocol stack. 
Threats Consequences Countermeasures 
Integrity • Modification of user data 
• Trojan horse browser 
• Modification of memory 
• Modification of message 
traffic 
in transit 
• Loss of information 
• Compromise of machine 
• Vulnerability to all other 
threats 
Cryptographic 
checksums 
Confidentiality • Eavesdropping on the net 
• Theft of info from server 
• Theft of data from client 
• Info about network 
configuration 
• Info about which client talks 
to server 
• Loss of information 
• Loss of privacy 
Encryption, Web 
proxies 
Denial of 
Service 
• Killing of user threads 
• Flooding machine with bogus 
requests 
• Filling up disk or memory 
• Isolating machine by DNS 
attacks 
• Disruptive 
• Annoying 
• Prevent user from getting work 
done 
Difficult to prevent 
Authentication • Impersonation of legitimate 
users 
• Data forgery 
• Misrepresentation of user 
• Belief that false information 
is valid 
Cryptographic 
techniques 
Table 6.1 A Comparison of Threats on the Web 

190 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
Figure 6.1 illustrates this difference. One way to provide Web security is 
to use IP security (IPsec) (Figure 6.1a). The advantage of using IPsec is that it is 
transparent to end users and applications and provides a general-purpose solution. 
Furthermore, IPsec includes a filtering capability so that only selected traffic need 
incur the overhead of IPsec processing. 
Another relatively general-purpose solution is to implement security just 
above TCP (Figure 6.1b). The foremost example of this approach is the Secure 
Sockets Layer (SSL) and the follow-on Internet standard known as Transport 
Layer Security (TLS). At this level, there are two implementation choices. For full 
generality, SSL (or TLS) could be provided as part of the underlying protocol suite 
and therefore be transparent to applications. Alternatively, TLS can be embedded 
in specific packages. For example, virtually all browsers come equipped with TLS, 
and most Web servers have implemented the protocol. 
Application-specific security services are embedded within the particular 
application. Figure 6.1c shows examples of this architecture. The advantage of this 
approach is that the service can be tailored to the specific needs of a given application. 
6.2 T ransport Layer Security 
One of the most widely used security services is Transport Layer Security (TSL); 
the current version is Version 1.2, defined in RFC 5246. TLS is an Internet standard 
that evolved from a commercial protocol known as Secure Sockets Layer 
(SSL). Although SSL implementations are still around, it has been deprecated by 
IETF and is disabled by most corporations offering TLS software. TLS is a generalpurpose 
service implemented as a set of protocols that rely on TCP. At this level, 
there are two implementation choices. For full generality, TLS could be provided 
as part of the underlying protocol suite and therefore be transparent to applications. 
Alternatively, TLS can be embedded in specific packages. For example, most 
browsers come equipped with TLS, and most Web servers have implemented the 
protocol. 
TLS Architecture 
TLS is designed to make use of TCP to provide a reliable end-to-end secure service. 
TLS is not a single protocol but rather two layers of protocols, as illustrated in 
Figure 6.2. 
Figure 6.1 Relative Location of Security Facilities in the TCP/IP Protocol Stack 
HTTP SMTP 
TCP 
IP/IPSec 
(a) Network level 
FTP 
HTTP SMTP 
TCP 
SSL or TLS 
IP 
(b) Transport level 
FTP 
IP 
S/MIME 
Kerberos HTTP 
UDP 
SMTP 
(c) Application level 
TCP 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 191 
The TLS Record Protocol provides basic security services to various higherlayer 
protocols. In particular, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), which 
provides the transfer service for Web client/server interaction, can operate on top 
of TLS. Three higher-layer protocols are defined as part of TLS: the Handshake 
Protocol; the Change Cipher Spec Protocol; and the Alert Protocol. These TLSspecific 
protocols are used in the management of TLS exchanges and are examined 
later in this section. A fourth protocol, the Heartbeat Protocol, is defined in a separate 
RFC and is also discussed subsequently in this section. 
Two important TLS concepts are the TLS session and the TLS connection, 
which are defined in the specification as follows: 
■■ Connection: A connection is a transport (in the OSI layering model definition) 
that provides a suitable type of service. For TLS, such connections are peer-topeer 
relationships. The connections are transient. Every connection is associated 
with one session. 
■■ Session: A TLS session is an association between a client and a server. Sessions 
are created by the Handshake Protocol. Sessions define a set of cryptographic 
security parameters, which can be shared among multiple connections. Sessions 
are used to avoid the expensive negotiation of new security parameters for 
each connection. 
Between any pair of parties (applications such as HTTP on client and server), 
there may be multiple secure connections. In theory, there may also be multiple 
simultaneous sessions between parties, but this feature is not used in practice. 
There are a number of states associated with each session. Once a session is 
established, 
there is a current operating state for both read and write (i.e., receive 
and send). In addition, during the Handshake Protocol, pending read and write 
states are created. Upon successful conclusion of the Handshake Protocol, the 
pending states become the current states. 
A session state is defined by the following parameters: 
■■ Session identifier: An arbitrary byte sequence chosen by the server to identify 
an active or resumable session state. 
■■ Peer certificate: An X509.v3 certificate of the peer. This element of the state 
may be null. 
Figure 6.2 TLS Protocol Stack 
IP 
TCP 
Record protocol 
Handshake 
protocol 
Change 
cipher spec 
protocol 
Alert 
protocol HTTP Heartbeat 
protocol 

192 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
■■ Compression method: The algorithm used to compress data prior to encryption. 
■■ Cipher spec: Specifies the bulk data encryption algorithm (such as null, AES, 
etc.) and a hash algorithm (such as MD5 or SHA-1) used for MAC calculation. 
It also defines cryptographic attributes such as the hash_size. 
■■ Master secret: 48-byte secret shared between the client and server. 
■■ Is resumable: A flag indicating whether the session can be used to initiate new 
connections. 
A connection state is defined by the following parameters: 
■■ Server and client random: Byte sequences that are chosen by the server and 
client for each connection. 
■■ Server write MAC secret: The secret key used in MAC operations on data sent 
by the server. 
■■ Client write MAC secret: The symmetric key used in MAC operations on data 
sent by the client. 
■■ Server write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the 
server and decrypted by the client. 
■■ Client write key: The symmetric encryption key for data encrypted by the 
client 
and decrypted by the server. 
■■ Initialization vectors: When a block cipher in CBC mode is used, an initialization 
vector (IV) is maintained for each key. This field is first initialized by 
the TLS Handshake Protocol. Thereafter, the final ciphertext block from each 
record 
is preserved for use as the IV with the following record. 
■■ Sequence numbers: Each party maintains separate sequence numbers for 
transmitted and received messages for each connection. When a party sends or 
receives a “change cipher spec message,” the appropriate sequence number is 
set to zero. Sequence numbers may not exceed 264 - 1. 
TLS Record Protocol 
The TLS Record Protocol provides two services for TLS connections: 
■■ Confidentiality: The Handshake Protocol defines a shared secret key that is 
used for conventional encryption of TLS payloads. 
■■ Message Integrity: The Handshake Protocol also defines a shared secret key 
that is used to form a message authentication code (MAC). 
Figure 6.3 indicates the overall operation of the TLS Record Protocol. The 
Record Protocol takes an application message to be transmitted, fragments the data 
into manageable blocks, optionally compresses the data, applies a MAC, encrypts, 
adds a header, and transmits the resulting unit in a TCP segment. Received data 
are decrypted, verified, decompressed, and reassembled before being delivered to 
higher-level users. 
The first step is fragmentation. Each upper-layer message is fragmented into 
blocks of 214 bytes (16,384 bytes) or less. Next, compression is optionally applied. 
Compression must be lossless and may not increase the content length by more than 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 193 
1024 bytes.1 In TLSv2, no compression algorithm is specified, so the default compression 
algorithm is null. 
The next step in processing is to compute a message authentication code over 
the compressed data. TLS makes use of the HMAC algorithm defined in RFC 2104. 
Recall from Chapter 3 that HMAC is defined as 
HMACK(M) = H[(K+ opad) ‘ H[(K+ ipad) ‘ M]] 
where
H = embedded hash function (for TLS, either MD5 or SHA-1) 
M = message input to HMAC 
K+ = secret key padded with zeros on the left so that the result is equal to 
the block length of the hash code (for MD5 and SHA-1, block 
length = 512 bits) 
ipad = 00110110 (36 in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits) 
opad = 01011100 (5C in hexadecimal) repeated 64 times (512 bits) 
For TLS, the MAC calculation encompasses the fields indicated in the following 
expression: 
HMAC_hash(MAC_write_secret, seq_num ‘ TLSCompressed.type ‘ 
TLSCompressed.version ‘ TLSCompressed.length ‘ TLSCompressed.fragment) 
The MAC calculation covers all of the fields XXX, plus the field 
TLSCompressed.version, which is the version of the protocol being employed. 
Next, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted using symmetric 
encryption. Encryption may not increase the content length by more than 1024 bytes, 
1Of course, one hopes that compression shrinks rather than expands the data. However, for very short 
blocks, it is possible, because of formatting conventions, that the compression algorithm will actually provide 
output that is longer than the input. 
Figure 6.3 TLS Record Protocol Operation 
Application data 
Fragment 
Compress 
Add MAC 
Encrypt 
Append TLS 
record header 

194 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
so that the total length may not exceed 214 + 2048. The following encryption algorithms 
are permitted: 
Block Cipher Stream Cipher 
Algorithm Key Size Algorithm Key Size 
AES 
3DES 
128, 256 
168 
RC4-128 128 
For stream encryption, the compressed message plus the MAC are encrypted. 
Note that the MAC is computed before encryption takes place and that the MAC is 
then encrypted along with the plaintext or compressed plaintext. 
For block encryption, padding may be added after the MAC prior to encryption. 
The padding is in the form of a number of padding bytes followed by a onebyte 
indication of the length of the padding. The padding can be any amount that 
results in a total that is a multiple of the cipher’s block length, up to a maximum 
of 255 bytes. For example, if the cipher block length is 16 bytes (e.g., AES) and if 
the plaintext (or compressed text if compression is used) plus MAC plus padding 
length byte is 79 bytes long, then the padding length (in bytes) can be 1, 17, 33, and 
so on, up to 161. At a padding length of 161, the total length is 79 + 161 = 240. A 
variable padding length may be used to frustrate attacks based on an analysis of 
the lengths of exchanged messages. 
The final step of TLS Record Protocol processing is to prepend a header consisting 
of the following fields: 
■■ Content Type (8 bits): The higher-layer protocol used to process the enclosed 
fragment. 
■■ Major Version (8 bits): Indicates major version of TLS in use. For TLSv2, the 
value is 3. 
■■ Minor Version (8 bits): Indicates minor version in use. For TLSv2, the value is 1. 
■■ Compressed Length (16 bits): The length in bytes of the plaintext fragment 
(or compressed fragment if compression is used). The maximum value is 
214 + 2048. 
The content types that have been defined are change_cipher_spec, 
alert, handshake, and application_data. The first three are the TLSspecific 
protocols, discussed next. Note that no distinction is made among the various 
applications (e.g., HTTP) that might use TLS; the content of the data created by 
such applications is opaque to TLS. 
Figure 6.4 illustrates the TLS record format. 
Change Cipher Spec Protocol 
The Change Cipher Spec Protocol is one of the four TLS-specific protocols that use 
the TLS Record Protocol, and it is the simplest. This protocol consists of a single 
message (Figure 6.5a), which consists of a single byte with the value 1. The sole purpose 
of this message is to cause the pending state to be copied into the current state, 
which updates the cipher suite to be used on this connection. 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 195 
Alert Protocol 
The Alert Protocol is used to convey TLS-related alerts to the peer entity. As with 
other applications that use TLS, alert messages are compressed and encrypted, as 
specified by the current state. 
Each message in this protocol consists of two bytes (Figure 6.5b). The first 
byte takes the value warning (1) or fatal (2) to convey the severity of the message. 
If the level is fatal, TLS immediately terminates the connection. Other connections 
on the same session may continue, but no new connections on this session may 
be established. The second byte contains a code that indicates the specific alert. 
The following 
alerts are always fatal: 
■■ unexpected_message: An inappropriate message was received. 
■■ bad_record_mac: An incorrect MAC was received. 
■■ decompression_failure: The decompression function received improper input 
(e.g., unable to decompress or decompress to greater than maximum allowable 
length). 
■■ handshake_failure: Sender was unable to negotiate an acceptable set of security 
parameters given the options available. 
■■ illegal_parameter: A field in a handshake message was out of range or inconsistent 
with other fields. 
Figure 6.5 TLS Record Protocol Payload 
1 
(a) Change cipher spec protocol 
1 byte 
Type 
(c) Handshake protocol 
1 byte 
Length 
3 bytes 
Content 
Ú 0 bytes 
(d) Other upper-layer protocol (e.g., HTTP) 
Opaque content 
Ú 1 byte 
Level 
(b) Alert protocol 
1 byte 1 byte 
Alert 
Figure 6.4 TLS Record Format 
Content 
type 
Major 
version 
Minor 
version 
Compressed 
length 
Plaintext 
(optionally 
compressed) 
MAC (0, 16, or 20 bytes) 
Encrypted 

196 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
■■ decryption_failed: A ciphertext decrypted in an invalid way; either it was not 
an even multiple of the block length or its padding values, when checked, were 
incorrect. 
■■ record_overflow: A TLS record was received with a payload (ciphertext) 
whose length exceeds 214 + 2048 bytes, or the ciphertext decrypted to a length 
of greater than 214 + 1024 bytes. 
■■ unknown_ca: A valid certificate chain or partial chain was received, but the 
certificate was not accepted because the CA certificate could not be located or 
could not be matched with a known, trusted CA. 
■■ access_denied: A valid certificate was received, but when access control was 
applied, the sender decided not to proceed with the negotiation. 
■■ decode_error: A message could not be decoded, because either a field was out 
of its specified range or the length of the message was incorrect. 
■■ export_restriction: A negotiation not in compliance with export restrictions on 
key length was detected. 
■■ protocol_version: The protocol version the client attempted to negotiate is 
recognized but not supported. 
■■ insufficient_security: Returned instead of handshake_failure when a negotiation 
has failed specifically because the server requires ciphers more secure 
than those supported by the client. 
■■ internal_error: An internal error unrelated to the peer or the correctness of 
the protocol makes it impossible to continue. 
The remaining alerts are the following. 
■■ close_notify: Notifies the recipient that the sender will not send any more messages 
on this connection. Each party is required to send a close_notify alert 
before closing the write side of a connection. 
■■ bad_certificate: A received certificate was corrupt (e.g., contained a signature 
that did not verify). 
■■ unsupported_certificate: The type of the received certificate is not supported. 
■■ certificate_revoked: A certificate has been revoked by its signer. 
■■ certificate_expired: A certificate has expired. 
■■ certificate_unknown: Some other unspecified issue arose in processing the 
certificate, rendering it unacceptable. 
■■ decrypt_error: A handshake cryptographic operation failed, including being 
unable to verify a signature, decrypt a key exchange, or validate a finished 
message. 
■■ user_canceled: This handshake is being canceled for some reason unrelated to 
a protocol failure. 
■■ no_renegotiation: Sent by a client in response to a hello request or by the 
server in response to a client hello after initial handshaking. Either of these 
messages would normally result in renegotiation, but this alert indicates that 
the sender is not able to renegotiate. This message is always a warning. 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 197 
Handshake Protocol 
The most complex part of TLS is the Handshake Protocol. This protocol allows 
the server and client to authenticate each other and to negotiate an encryption and 
MAC algorithm and cryptographic keys to be used to protect data sent in a TLS 
record. The Handshake Protocol is used before any application data is transmitted. 
The Handshake Protocol consists of a series of messages exchanged by client 
and server. All of these have the format shown in Figure 6.5c. Each message has 
three fields: 
■■ Type (1 byte): Indicates one of 10 messages. Table 6.2 lists the defined message 
types. 
■■ Length (3 bytes): The length of the message in bytes. 
■■ Content (# 0 bytes): The parameters associated with this message; these are 
listed in Table 6.2. 
Figure 6.6 shows the initial exchange needed to establish a logical connection 
between client and server. The exchange can be viewed as having four phases. 
Phase 1. Establish Security Capabilities Phase 1 initiates a logical connection 
and establishes the security capabilities that will be associated with it. The exchange 
is initiated by the client, which sends a client_hello message with the following 
parameters: 
■■ Version: The highest TLS version understood by the client. 
■■ Random: A client-generated random structure consisting of a 32-bit timestamp 
and 28 bytes generated by a secure random number generator. These values 
serve as nonces and are used during key exchange to prevent replay attacks. 
■■ Session ID: A variable-length session identifier. A nonzero value indicates that 
the client wishes to update the parameters of an existing connection or to create 
a new connection on this session. A zero value indicates that the client 
wishes to establish a new connection on a new session. 
Message Type Parameters 
hello_request null 
client_hello version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method 
server_hello version, random, session id, cipher suite, compression method 
certificate chain of X.509v3 certificates 
server_key_exchange parameters, signature 
certificate_request type, authorities 
server_done null 
certificate_verify signature 
client_key_exchange parameters, signature 
finished hash value 
Table 6.2 TLS Handshake Protocol Message Types 

198 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
■■ CipherSuite: This is a list that contains the combinations of cryptographic 
algorithms supported by the client, in decreasing order of preference. Each 
element of the list (each cipher suite) defines both a key exchange algorithm 
and a CipherSpec; these are discussed subsequently. 
■■ Compression Method: This is a list of the compression methods the client 
supports. 
After sending the client_hello message, the client waits for the server_ 
hello message, 
which contains the same parameters as the client_hello 
Figure 6.6 Handshake Protocol Action 
Client Server
Phase 1 
Establish security capabilities, including 
protocol version, session ID, cipher suite, 
compression method, and initial random 
numbers. 
Phase 2 
Server may send certicate, key exchange, 
and request certicate. Server signals end 
of hello message phase. 
Phase 3 
Client sends certicate if requested. Client 
sends key exchange. Client may send 
certicate verication. 
Phase 4 
Change cipher suite and nish 
handshake protocol. 
Note: Shaded transfers are 
optional or situation-dependent 
messages that are not always sent. 
nished 
change_cipher_spec 
nished 
change_cipher_spec 
certicate_verify 
client_key_exchange 
certicate 
server_hello_done 
certicate_request 
server_key_exchange 
certicate 
server_hello 
client_hello 
Time 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 199 
message. For the server_hello message, the following conventions apply. The 
Version 
field contains the lowest of the version suggested by the client and the highest 
supported by the server. The Random field is generated by the server and is independent 
of the client’s Random field. If the SessionID field of the client was nonzero, the 
same value is used by the server; otherwise the server’s SessionID field contains the 
value for a new session. The CipherSuite field contains the single cipher suite selected 
by the server from those proposed by the client. The Compression field contains the 
compression method selected by the server from those proposed by the client. 
The first element of the Ciphersuite parameter is the key exchange method 
(i.e., the means by which the cryptographic keys for conventional encryption and 
MAC are exchanged). The following key exchange methods are supported. 
■■ RSA: The secret key is encrypted with the receiver’s RSA public key. A publickey 
certificate for the receiver’s key must be made available. 
■■ Fixed Diffie–Hellman: This is a Diffie–Hellman key exchange in which the 
server’s certificate contains the Diffie–Hellman public parameters signed 
by the certificate authority (CA). That is, the public-key certificate contains 
the Diffie–Hellman public-key parameters. The client provides its Diffie– 
Hellman public-key parameters either in a certificate, if client authentication 
is required, 
or in a key exchange message. This method results in a fixed secret 
key between two peers based on the Diffie–Hellman calculation using the 
fixed public keys. 
■■ Ephemeral Diffie–Hellman: This technique is used to create ephemeral (temporary, 
one-time) secret keys. In this case, the Diffie–Hellman public keys are 
exchanged and signed using the sender’s private RSA or DSS key. The receiver 
can use the corresponding public key to verify the signature. Certificates are used 
to authenticate the public keys. This would appear to be the most secure of the 
three Diffie–Hellman options because it results in a temporary, authenticated key. 
■■ Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The base Diffie–Hellman algorithm is used 
with no authentication. That is, each side sends its public Diffie–Hellman 
parameters 
to the other with no authentication. This approach is vulnerable to 
man-in-the-middle attacks, in which the attacker conducts anonymous Diffie– 
Hellman with both parties. 
Following the definition of a key exchange method is the CipherSpec, which 
includes the following fields: 
■■ CipherAlgorithm: Any of the algorithms mentioned earlier: RC4, RC2, DES, 
3DES, DES40, or IDEA 
■■ MACAlgorithm: MD5 or SHA-1 
■■ CipherType: Stream or Block 
■■ IsExportable: True or False 
■■ HashSize: 0, 16 (for MD5), or 20 (for SHA-1) bytes 
■■ Key Material: A sequence of bytes that contain data used in generating the 
write keys 
■■ IV Size: The size of the Initialization Value for Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) 
encryption 

200 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
Phase 2. Server Authentication and Key Exchange The server begins this 
phase by sending its certificate if it needs to be authenticated; the message contains 
one or a chain of X.509 certificates. The certificate message is required for 
any agreed-on key exchange method except anonymous Diffie–Hellman. Note 
that if fixed Diffie–Hellman is used, this certificate message functions as the server’s 
key exchange message because it contains the server’s public Diffie–Hellman 
parameters. 
Next, a server_key_exchange message may be sent if it is required. It is not 
required in two instances: (1) The server has sent a certificate with fixed Diffie– 
Hellman parameters; or (2) RSA key exchange is to be used. The server_key_exchange 
message is needed for the following: 
■■ Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The message content consists of the two global 
Diffie–Hellman values (a prime number and a primitive root of that number) 
plus the server’s public Diffie–Hellman key (see Figure 10.1). 
■■ Ephemeral Diffie–Hellman: The message content includes the three Diffie– 
Hellman parameters provided for anonymous Diffie–Hellman plus a signature 
of those parameters. 
■■ RSA key exchange (in which the server is using RSA but has a signature-only 
RSA key): Accordingly, the client cannot simply send a secret key encrypted 
with the server’s public key. Instead, the server must create a temporary RSA 
public/private key pair and use the server_key_exchange message to send the 
public key. The message content includes the two parameters of the temporary 
RSA public key (exponent and modulus; see Figure 9.5) plus a signature of 
those parameters. 
Some further details about the signatures are warranted. As usual, a signature 
is created by taking the hash of a message and encrypting it with the sender’s private 
key. In this case, the hash is defined as 
hash(ClientHello.random ‘ ServerHello.random ‘ ServerParams) 
So the hash covers not only the Diffie–Hellman or RSA parameters but also the 
two nonces from the initial hello messages. This ensures against replay attacks and 
misrepresentation. In the case of a DSS signature, the hash is performed using the 
SHA-1 algorithm. In the case of an RSA signature, both an MD5 and an SHA-1 
hash are calculated, and the concatenation of the two hashes (36 bytes) is encrypted 
with the server’s private key. 
Next, a nonanonymous server (server not using anonymous Diffie–Hellman) 
can request a certificate from the client. The certificate_request message includes 
two parameters: certificate_type and certificate_authorities. The certificate type 
indicates 
the public-key algorithm and its use: 
■■ RSA, signature only 
■■ DSS, signature only 
■■ RSA for fixed Diffie–Hellman; in this case the signature is used only for 
authentication, by sending a certificate signed with RSA 
■■ DSS for fixed Diffie–Hellman; again, used only for authentication 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 201 
The second parameter in the certificate_request message is a list of the distinguished 
names of acceptable certificate authorities. 
The final message in phase 2, and one that is always required, is the server_ 
done message, which is sent by the server to indicate the end of the server hello and 
associated messages. After sending this message, the server will wait for a client 
response. This message has no parameters. 
Phase 3. Client Authentication and Key Exchange Upon receipt of the 
server_done message, the client should verify that the server provided a valid 
certificate (if required) and check that the server_hello parameters are acceptable. 
If all is satisfactory, the client sends one or more messages back to the server. 
If the server has requested a certificate, the client begins this phase by sending 
a certificate message. If no suitable certificate is available, the client sends a 
no_certificate alert instead. 
Next is the client_key_exchange message, which must be sent in this phase. 
The content of the message depends on the type of key exchange, as follows: 
■■ RSA: The client generates a 48-byte pre-master secret and encrypts with the 
public key from the server’s certificate or temporary RSA key from a server_ 
key_exchange message. Its use to compute a master secret is explained later. 
■■ Ephemeral or Anonymous Diffie–Hellman: The client’s public Diffie–Hellman 
parameters are sent. 
■■ Fixed Diffie–Hellman: The client’s public Diffie–Hellman parameters were 
sent in a certificate message, so the content of this message is null. 
Finally, in this phase, the client may send a certificate_verify message to provide 
explicit verification of a client certificate. This message is only sent following 
any client certificate that has signing capability (i.e., all certificates except those 
containing fixed Diffie–Hellman parameters). This message signs a hash code based 
on the preceding messages, defined as 
CertificateVerify.signature.md5_hash 
MD5(handshake_messages); 
Certificate.signature.sha_hash 
SHA(handshake_messages); 
where handshake_messages refers to all Handshake Protocol messages sent or 
received starting at client_hello but not including this message. If the user’s 
private key is DSS, then it is used to encrypt the SHA-1 hash. If the user’s private 
key is RSA, it is used to encrypt the concatenation of the MD5 and SHA-1 hashes. 
In either case, the purpose is to verify the client’s ownership of the private key for 
the client certificate. Even if someone is misusing the client’s certificate, he or she 
would be unable to send this message. 
Phase 4. Finish Phase 4 completes the setting up of a secure connection. The client 
sends a change_cipher_spec message and copies the pending CipherSpec into the 
current CipherSpec. Note that this message is not considered part of the Handshake 
Protocol but is sent using the Change Cipher Spec Protocol. The client then immediately 
sends the finished message under the new algorithms, keys, and secrets. 

202 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
The finished message verifies that the key exchange and authentication processes 
were successful. The content of the finished message is: 
PRF(master_secret, finished_label, MD5(handshake_messages) ‘ SHA@1 
(handshake_messages)) 
where finished_label is the string “client finished” for the client and “server 
finished” for the server. 
In response to these two messages, the server sends its own change_ cipher_ 
spec message, transfers the pending to the current CipherSpec, and sends its finished 
message. At this point, the handshake is complete and the client and server 
may begin to exchange application-layer data. 
Cryptographic Computations 
Two further items are of interest: (1) the creation of a shared master secret by 
means of the key exchange; and (2) the generation of cryptographic parameters 
from the master secret. 
Master Secret Creation The shared master secret is a one-time 48-byte value 
(384 bits) generated for this session by means of secure key exchange. The creation 
is in two stages. First, a pre_master_secret is exchanged. Second, the master_ 
secret is calculated by both parties. For pre_master_secret exchange, there 
are two possibilities. 
■■ RSA: A 48-byte pre_master_secret is generated by the client, encrypted with 
the server’s public RSA key, and sent to the server. The server decrypts the 
ciphertext using its private key to recover the pre_master_secret. 
■■ Diffie–Hellman: Both client and server generate a Diffie–Hellman public key. 
After these are exchanged, each side performs the Diffie–Hellman calculation 
to create the shared pre_master_secret. 
Both sides now compute the master_secret as 
master_secret = 
PRF(pre_master_secret, “master secret”, ClientHello.random ‘ ServerHello 
.random) 
where ClientHello.random and ServerHello.random are the two nonce 
values exchanged in the initial hello messages. 
The algorithm is performed until 48 bytes of pseudorandom output are produced. 
The calculation of the key block material (MAC secret keys, session encryption 
keys, and IVs) is defined as 
key_block = 
PRF(SecurityParameters.master_secret, “key expansion”, 
SecurityParameters.server_random ‘ SecurityParameters.client_random) 
until enough output has been generated. 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 203 
Generation of Cryptographic Parameters CipherSpecs require a client write 
MAC secret, a server write MAC secret, a client write key, a server write key, a 
client write IV, and a server write IV, which are generated from the master secret 
in that order. These parameters are generated from the master secret by hashing 
the master secret into a sequence of secure bytes of sufficient length for all needed 
parameters. 
The generation of the key material from the master secret uses the same format 
for generation of the master secret from the pre-master secret as 
key_block = MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=A> ‘ master_secret ‘ 
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘ 
MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=BB> ‘ master_secret ‘ 
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘ 
MD5(master_secret ‘ SHA(=CCC> ‘ master_secret ‘ 
ServerHello.random ‘ ClientHello.random)) ‘c 
until enough output has been generated. The result of this algorithmic structure is a 
pseudorandom function. We can view the master_secret as the pseudorandom 
seed value to the function. The client and server random numbers can be viewed as 
salt values to complicate cryptanalysis (see Chapter 11 for a discussion of the use of 
salt values). 
Pseudorandom Function TLS makes use of a pseudorandom function referred 
to as PRF to expand secrets into blocks of data for purposes of key generation or 
validation. The objective is to make use of a relatively small, shared secret value but 
to generate longer blocks of data in a way that is secure from the kinds of attacks 
made on hash functions and MACs. The PRF is based on the data expansion function 
(Figure 6.7) given as 
P_hash(secret, seed) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(1) ‘ seed) ‘ 
HMAC_hash(secret, A(2) ‘ seed) ‘ 
HMAC_hash(secret, A(3) ‘ seed) ‘ 
where A() is defined as 
A(0) = seed 
A(i) = HMAC_hash(secret, A(i - 1)) 
The data expansion function makes use of the HMAC algorithm with either MD5 
or SHA-1 as the underlying hash function. As can be seen, P_hash can be iterated 
as many times as necessary to produce the required quantity of data. For example, if 
P_SHA256 was used to generate 80 bytes of data, it would have to be iterated three 
times (through A(3)), producing 96 bytes of data of which the last 16 would be discarded. 
In this case, P_MD5 would have to be iterated four times, producing exactly 
64 bytes of data. Note that each iteration involves two executions of HMAC, each 
of which in turn involves two executions of the underlying hash algorithm. 

204 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
To make PRF as secure as possible, it uses two hash algorithms in a way that 
should guarantee its security if either algorithm remains secure. PRF is defined as 
PRF(secret, label, seed) = P_6hash7(secret, label ‘ seed) 
PRF takes as input a secret value, an identifying label, and a seed value and 
produces an output of arbitrary length. 
Heartbeat Protocol 
In the context of computer networks, a heartbeat is a periodic signal generated by 
hardware or software to indicate normal operation or to synchronize other parts of 
a system. A heartbeat protocol is typically used to monitor the availability of a protocol 
entity. In the specific case of TLS, a Heartbeat protocol was defined in 2012 in 
RFC 6250 (Transport Layer Security (TLS) and Datagram Transport Layer Security 
(DTLS) Heartbeat Extension). 
Figure 6.7 TLS Function P_hash(secret, seed) 
Secret 
Seed 
Seed
A(1) 
HMAC 
Secret 
Secret 
Length = hash size 
Secret 
Seed
A(2) 
HMAC 
HMAC Secret 
Seed 
A(3) 
HMAC 
HMAC 
Secret HMAC 

6.2 / Transport Layer Security 205 
The Heartbeat protocol runs on top of the TLS Record Protocol and consists 
of two message types: heartbeat_request and heartbeat_response. 
The use of the Heartbeat protocol is established during Phase 1 of the Handshake 
protocol (Figure 6.6). Each peer indicates whether it supports heartbeats. If heartbeats 
are supported, the peer indicates whether it is willing to receive heartbeat_request 
messages and respond with heartbeat_response messages or only 
willing to send heartbeat_request messages. 
A heartbeat_request message can be sent at any time. Whenever a request 
message is received, it should be answered promptly with a corresponding 
heartbeat_response message. The heartbeat_request message includes 
payload length, payload, and padding fields. The payload is a random content 
between 16 bytes and 64 Kbytes in length. The corresponding heartbeat_response 
message must include an exact copy of the received payload. The padding 
is also random content. The padding enables the sender to perform a path 
MTU (maximum transfer unit) discovery operation, by sending requests with increasing 
padding until there is no answer anymore, because one of the hosts on 
the path cannot handle the message. 
The heartbeat serves two purposes. First, it assures the sender that the recipient 
is still alive, even though there may not have been any activity over the underlying 
TCP connection for a while. Second, the heartbeat generates activity across 
the connection during idle periods, which avoids closure by a firewall that does not 
tolerate idle connections. 
The requirement for the exchange of a payload was designed into the Heartbeat 
protocol to support its use in a connectionless version of TLS known as Datagram 
Transport Layer Security (DTLS). Because a connectionless service is subject 
to packet loss, the payload enables the requestor to match response messages to 
request messages. For simplicity, the same version of the Heartbeat protocol is used 
with both TLS and DTLS. Thus, the payload is required for both TLS and DTLS. 
SSL/TLS ATTACKS 
Since the first introduction of SSL in 1994, and the subsequent standardization of 
TLS, numerous attacks have been devised against these protocols. The appearance 
of each attack has necessitated changes in the protocol, the encryption tools used, or 
some aspect of the implementation of SSL and TLS to counter these threats. 
Attack Categories We can group the attacks into four general categories: 
■■ Attacks on the handshake protocol: As early as 1998, an approach to compromising 
the handshake protocol based on exploiting the formatting and 
implementation of the RSA encryption scheme was presented [BLEI98]. As 
countermeasures 
were implemented the attack was refined and adjusted to not 
only thwart the countermeasures but also speed up the attack [e.g., BARD12]. 
■■ Attacks on the record and application data protocols: A number of vulnerabilities 
have been discovered in these protocols, leading to patches to counter the 
new threats. As a recent example, in 2011, researchers Thai Duong and Juliano 
Rizzo demonstrated a proof of concept called BEAST (Browser Exploit Against 
SSL/TLS) that turned what had been considered only a theoretical vulnerability 

206 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
into a practical attack [GOOD11]. BEAST leverages a type of cryptographic 
attack called a chosen-plaintext attack. The attacker mounts the attack by 
choosing a guess for the plaintext that is associated with a known ciphertext. The 
researchers developed a practical algorithm for launching successful attacks. 
Subsequent patches were able to thwart this attack. The authors of the BEAST 
attack are also the creators of the 2012 CRIME (Compression Ratio Info-leak 
Made Easy) attack, which can allow an attacker to recover the content of web 
cookies when data compression is used along with TLS [GOOD12]. When used 
to recover the content of secret authentication cookies, it allows an attacker to 
perform session hijacking on an authenticated web session. 
■■ Attacks on the PKI: Checking the validity of X.509 certificates is an activity 
subject to a variety of attacks, both in the context of SSL/TLS and elsewhere. 
For example, [GEOR12] demonstrated that commonly used libraries for 
SSL/TLS suffer from vulnerable certificate validation implementations. The 
authors 
revealed weaknesses in the source code of OpenSSL, GnuTLS, JSSE, 
ApacheHttpClient, Weberknecht, cURL, PHP, Python and applications built 
upon or with these products. 
■■ Other attacks: [MEYE13] lists a number of attacks that do not fit into any of 
the preceding categories. One example is an attack announced in 2011 by the 
German hacker group The Hackers Choice, which is a DoS attack [KUMA11]. 
The attack creates a heavy processing load on a server by overwhelming the 
target with SSL/TLS handshake requests. Boosting system load is done by 
establishing new connections or using renegotiation. Assuming that the majority 
of computation during a handshake is done by the server, the attack creates 
more system load on the server than on the source device, leading to a DoS. 
The server is forced to continuously recompute random numbers and keys. 
The history of attacks and countermeasures for SSL/TLS is representative of 
that for other Internet-based protocols. A “perfect” protocol and a “perfect” implementation 
strategy are never achieved. A constant back-and-forth between threats 
and countermeasures determines the evolution of Internet-based protocols. 
TLSv1.3 
In 2014, the IETF TLS working group began work on a version 1.3 of TLS. The 
primary aim is to improve the security of TLS. As of this writing, TLSv1.3 is still 
in a draft stage, but the final standard is likely to be very close to the current draft. 
Among the significant changes from version 1.2 are the following: 
■■ TLSv1.3 removes support for a number of options and functions. Removing 
code that implements functions no longer needed reduces the chances 
of potentially dangerous coding errors and reduces the attack surface. The 
deleted items include: 
–Compression 
–Ciphers that do not offer authenticated encryption 
–Static RSA and DH key exchange 
–32-bit timestamp as part of the Random parameter in the client_hello 
message 

6.3 / HTTPS 207 
–Renegotiation 
–Change Cipher Spec Protocol 
–RC4 
–Use of MD5 and SHA-224 hashes with signatures 
■■ TLSv1.3 uses Diffie–Hellman or Elliptic Curve Diffie–Hellman for key 
exchange and does not permit RSA. The danger with RSA is that if the private 
key is compromised, all handshakes using these cipher suites will be compromised. 
With DH or ECDH, a new key is negotiated for each handshake. 
■■ TLSv1.3 allows for a “1 round trip time” handshake by changing the order of 
message sent with establishing a secure connection. The client sends a Client 
Key Exchange message containing its cryptographic parameters for key establishment 
before a cipher suite has been negotiated. This enables a server 
to calculate 
keys for encryption and authentication before sending its first 
response. Reducing the number of packets sent during this handshake phase 
speeds up the process and reduces the attack surface. 
These changes should improve the efficiency and security of TLS. 
6.3 HTTP S 
HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) refers to the combination of HTTP and SSL to implement 
secure communication between a Web browser and a Web server. The HTTPS 
capability is built into all modern Web browsers. Its use depends on the Web server 
supporting HTTPS communication. For example, some search engines do not support 
HTTPS. 
The principal difference seen by a user of a Web browser is that URL (uniform 
resource locator) addresses begin with https:// rather than http://. A normal HTTP 
connection uses port 80. If HTTPS is specified, port 443 is used, which invokes SSL. 
When HTTPS is used, the following elements of the communication are 
encrypted: 
■■ URL of the requested document 
■■ Contents of the document 
■■ Contents of browser forms (filled in by browser user) 
■■ Cookies sent from browser to server and from server to browser 
■■ Contents of HTTP header 
HTTPS is documented in RFC 2818, HTTP Over TLS. There is no fundamental 
change in using HTTP over either SSL or TLS, and both implementations are 
referred to as HTTPS. 
Connection Initiation 
For HTTPS, the agent acting as the HTTP client also acts as the TLS client. The 
client initiates a connection to the server on the appropriate port and then sends 
the TLS ClientHello to begin the TLS handshake. When the TLS handshake has 

208 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
finished, the client may then initiate the first HTTP request. All HTTP data is to be 
sent as TLS application data. Normal HTTP behavior, including retained connections, 
should be followed. 
There are three levels of awareness of a connection in HTTPS. At the HTTP 
level, an HTTP client requests a connection to an HTTP server by sending a connection 
request to the next lowest layer. Typically, the next lowest layer is TCP, 
but it also may be TLS/SSL. At the level of TLS, a session is established between a 
TLS client and a TLS server. This session can support one or more connections at 
any time. As we have seen, a TLS request to establish a connection begins with the 
establishment of a TCP connection between the TCP entity on the client side and 
the TCP entity on the server side. 
Connection Closure 
An HTTP client or server can indicate the closing of a connection by including the 
following line in an HTTP record: Connection: close. This indicates that the 
connection will be closed after this record is delivered. 
The closure of an HTTPS connection requires that TLS close the connection 
with the peer TLS entity on the remote side, which will involve closing the 
underlying TCP connection. At the TLS level, the proper way to close a connection 
is for each side to use the TLS alert protocol to send a close_notify alert. 
TLS implementations must initiate an exchange of closure alerts before closing a 
connection. A TLS implementation may, after sending a closure alert, close the 
connection without waiting for the peer to send its closure alert, generating an 
“incomplete close”. Note that an implementation that does this may choose to 
reuse the session. This should only be done when the application knows (typically 
through detecting HTTP message boundaries) that it has received all the message 
data that it cares about. 
HTTP clients also must be able to cope with a situation in which the underlying 
TCP connection is terminated without a prior close_notify alert and without a 
Connection: close indicator. Such a situation could be due to a programming 
error on the server or a communication error that causes the TCP connection to drop. 
However, the unannounced TCP closure could be evidence of some sort of attack. So 
the HTTPS client should issue some sort of security warning when this occurs. 
6.4 Secure Shell (SSH) 
Secure Shell (SSH) is a protocol for secure network communications designed to 
be relatively simple and inexpensive to implement. The initial version, SSH1 was 
focused on providing a secure remote logon facility to replace TELNET and other 
remote 
logon schemes that provided no security. SSH also provides a more general 
client/server capability and can be used for such network functions as file transfer and 
e-mail. A new version, SSH2, fixes a number of security flaws in the original scheme. 
SSH2 is documented as a proposed standard in IETF RFCs 4250 through 4256. 
SSH client and server applications are widely available for most operating 
systems. 
It has become the method of choice for remote login and X tunneling and 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 209 
is rapidly becoming one of the most pervasive applications for encryption technology 
outside of embedded systems. 
SSH is organized as three protocols that typically run on top of TCP 
(Figure 6.8): 
■■ Transport Layer Protocol: Provides server authentication, data confidentiality, 
and data integrity with forward secrecy (i.e., if a key is compromised during 
one session, the knowledge does not affect the security of earlier sessions). The 
transport layer may optionally provide compression. 
■■ User Authentication Protocol: Authenticates the user to the server. 
■■ Connection Protocol: Multiplexes multiple logical communications channels 
over a single, underlying SSH connection. 
Transport Layer Protocol 
Host Keys Server authentication occurs at the transport layer, based on the server 
possessing a public/private key pair. A server may have multiple host keys using 
multiple different asymmetric encryption algorithms. Multiple hosts may share 
the same host key. In any case, the server host key is used during key exchange to 
authenticate the identity of the host. For this to be possible, the client must have a 
priori knowledge of the server’s public host key. RFC 4251 dictates two alternative 
trust models that can be used: 
1. The client has a local database that associates each host name (as typed by the 
user) with the corresponding public host key. This method requires no centrally 
administered infrastructure and no third-party coordination. The downside is that 
the database of name-to-key associations may become burdensome to maintain. 
Figure 6.8 SSH Protocol Stack 
SSH User 
Authentication Protocol 
SSH Transport Layer Protocol 
TCP 
IP 
Internet protocol provides datagram delivery across 
multiple networks. 
Transmission control protocol provides reliable, connectionoriented 
end-to-end delivery. 
Provides server authentication, condentiality, and integrity. 
It may optionally also provide compression. 
Authenticates the client-side 
user to the server. 
SSH 
Connection Protocol 
Multiplexes the encrypted 
tunnel into several logical 
channels. 

210 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
2. The host name-to-key association is certified by a trusted certification authority 
(CA). The client only knows the CA root key and can verify the validity of 
all host keys certified by accepted CAs. This alternative eases the maintenance 
problem, since ideally, only a single CA key needs to be securely stored on the 
client. On the other hand, each host key must be appropriately certified by a 
central authority before authorization is possible. 
Packet Exchange Figure 6.9 illustrates the sequence of events in the SSH 
Transport Layer Protocol. First, the client establishes a TCP connection to the 
server. This is done via the TCP protocol and is not part of the Transport Layer 
Protocol. Once the connection is established, the client and server exchange data, 
referred to as packets, in the data field of a TCP segment. Each packet is in the 
following 
format (Figure 6.10). 
■■ Packet length: Length of the packet in bytes, not including the packet length 
and MAC fields. 
■■ Padding length: Length of the random padding field. 
■■ Payload: Useful contents of the packet. Prior to algorithm negotiation, this 
field is uncompressed. If compression is negotiated, then in subsequent 
packets, 
this field is compressed. 
Figure 6.9 SSH Transport Layer Protocol Packet Exchanges 
Client Server 
SSH-protoversion-softwareversion 
Identication string 
exchange 
Algorithm 
negotiation 
End of 
key exchange 
Service 
request 
SSH-protoversion-softwareversion 
SSH_MSG_KEXINIT 
SSH_MSG_KEXINIT 
SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS 
SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS 
SSH_MSG_SERVICE_REQUEST 
Establish TCP Connection 
Key Exchange 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 211 
■■ Random padding: Once an encryption algorithm has been negotiated, this 
field is added. It contains random bytes of padding so that the total length of 
the packet (excluding the MAC field) is a multiple of the cipher block size, or 
8 bytes for a stream cipher. 
■■ Message authentication code (MAC): If message authentication has been 
negotiated, this field contains the MAC value. The MAC value is computed 
over the entire packet plus a sequence number, excluding the MAC field. The 
sequence number is an implicit 32-bit packet sequence that is initialized to 
zero for the first packet and incremented for every packet. The sequence number 
is not included in the packet sent over the TCP connection. 
Once an encryption algorithm has been negotiated, the entire packet 
(
excluding the MAC field) is encrypted after the MAC value is calculated. 
The SSH Transport Layer packet exchange consists of a sequence of steps 
(Figure 6.9). The first step, the identification string exchange, begins with the client 
sending a packet with an identification string of the form: 
SSH-protoversion-softwareversion SP comments CR LF 
Figure 6.10 SSH Transport Layer Protocol Packet Formation 
pktl pdl 
pktl = packet length 
pdl = padding length 
seq # Padding 
Payload 
SSH Packet 
Compressed payload 
Ciphertext 
COMPRESS 
ENCRYPT MAC 

212 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
where SP, CR, and LF are space character, carriage return, and line feed, respectively. 
An example of a valid string is SSH-2.0-billsSSH_3.6.3q3<CR><LF>. 
The server responds with its own identification string. These strings are used in the 
Diffie–Hellman key exchange. 
Next comes algorithm negotiation. Each side sends an SSH_MSG_KEXINIT 
containing lists of supported algorithms in the order of preference to the sender. 
There is one list for each type of cryptographic algorithm. The algorithms include 
key exchange, encryption, MAC algorithm, and compression algorithm. Table 6.3 
shows the allowable options for encryption, MAC, and compression. For each category, 
the algorithm chosen is the first algorithm on the client’s list that is also supported 
by the server. 
The next step is key exchange. The specification allows for alternative methods 
of key exchange, but at present, only two versions of Diffie–Hellman key 
exchange are specified. Both versions are defined in RFC 2409 and require only one 
packet in each direction. The following steps are involved in the exchange. In this, 
C is the client; 
S is the server; p is a large safe prime; g is a generator for a subgroup 
of GF(p); q is the order of the subgroup; V_S is S’s identification string; V_C is 
Table 6.3 SSH Transport Layer Cryptographic Algorithms 
MAC algorithm 
hmac-sha1* HMAC-SHA1; digest 
length = key length = 20 
hmac-sha1-96** First 96 bits of HMACSHA1; 
digest length = 12; 
key length = 20 
hmac-md5 HMAC-MD5; digest 
length = key length = 16 
hmac-md5-96 First 96 bits of 
HMAC-MD5; 
digest length = 12; 
key length = 16 
Compression algorithm 
none* No compression 
zlib Defined in RFC 1950 and 
RFC 1951 
Cipher 
3des-cbc* Three-key 3DES in CBC 
mode 
blowfish-cbc Blowfish in CBC mode 
twofish256-cbc Twofish in CBC mode with 
a 256-bit key 
twofish192-cbc Twofish with a 192-bit key 
twofish128-cbc Twofish with a 128-bit key 
aes256-cbc AES in CBC mode with a 
256-bit key 
aes192-cbc AES with a 192-bit key 
aes128-cbc** AES with a 128-bit key 
Serpent256-cbc Serpent in CBC mode with 
a 256-bit key 
Serpent192-cbc Serpent with a 192-bit key 
Serpent128-cbc Serpent with a 128-bit key 
arcfour RC4 with a 128-bit key 
cast128-cbc CAST-128 in CBC mode 
* = Required 
** = Recommended 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 213 
C’s identification string; K_S is S’s public host key; I_C is C’s SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message 
and I_S is S’s SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message that have been exchanged 
before this part begins. The values of p, g, and q are known to both client and server 
as a result of the algorithm selection negotiation. The hash function hash() is also 
decided during algorithm negotiation. 
1. C generates a random number x(1 6 x 6 q) and computes e = gx mod p. C 
sends e to S. 
2. S generates a random number y(0 6 y 6 q) and computes f = gy mod p. 
S receives e. It computes K = ey mod p, H = hash(V_C ‘ V_S ‘ I_C ‘ I_S ‘ K_S ‘ 
e ‘ f ‘ K), and signature s on H with its private host key. S sends (K_S ‘ f ‘ s) 
to C. The signing operation may involve a second hashing operation. 
3. C verifies that K_S really is the host key for S (e.g., using certificates or a local 
database). C is also allowed to accept the key without verification; however, 
doing so will render the protocol insecure against active attacks (but may be 
desirable for practical reasons in the short term in many environments). C then 
computes K = f x mod p, H = hash(V_C ‘ V_S ‘ I_C ‘ I_S ‘ K_S ‘ e ‘ f ‘ K), and 
verifies the signature s on H. 
As a result of these steps, the two sides now share a master key K. In addition, 
the server has been authenticated to the client, because the server has used its private 
key to sign its half of the Diffie–Hellman exchange. Finally, the hash value H 
serves as a session identifier for this connection. Once computed, the session identifier 
is not changed, even if the key exchange is performed again for this connection 
to obtain fresh keys. 
The end of key exchange is signaled by the exchange of SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS 
packets. At this point, both sides may start using the keys generated from K, as discussed 
subsequently. 
The final step is service request. The client sends an SSH_MSG_SERVICE_ 
REQUEST packet to request either the User Authentication or the Connection 
Protocol. Subsequent to this, all data is exchanged as the payload of an SSH 
Transport Layer packet, protected by encryption and MAC. 
Key Generation The keys used for encryption and MAC (and any needed IVs) 
are generated from the shared secret key K, the hash value from the key exchange 
H, and the session identifier, which is equal to H unless there has been a subsequent 
key exchange after the initial key exchange. The values are computed as follows. 
■■ Initial IV client to server: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;A< ‘ session_id) 
■■ Initial IV server to client: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;B< ‘ session_id) 
■■ Encryption key client to server: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;C< ‘ session_id) 
■■ Encryption key server to client: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;D< ‘ session_id) 
■■ Integrity key client to server: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;E< ‘ session_id) 
■■ Integrity key server to client: HASH(K ‘ H ‘ ;F< ‘ session_id) 
where HASH() is the hash function determined during algorithm negotiation. 

214 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
User Authentication Protocol 
The User Authentication Protocol provides the means by which the client is 
authenticated 
to the server. 
Message Types and Formats Three types of messages are always used in the User 
Authentication Protocol. Authentication requests from the client have the format: 
byte SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST (50) 
string user name 
string service name 
string method name 
. . . method specific fields 
where user name is the authorization identity the client is claiming, service 
name is the facility to which the client is requesting access (typically the SSH 
Connection Protocol), and method name is the authentication method being 
used in this request. The first byte has decimal value 50, which is interpreted as 
SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST. 
If the server either (1) rejects the authentication request or (2) accepts the 
request 
but requires one or more additional authentication methods, the server 
sends a message with the format: 
byte SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE (51) 
name-list authentications that can continue 
boolean partial success 
where the name-list is a list of methods that may productively continue the dialog. 
If the server accepts authentication, it sends a single byte message: SSH_MSG_ 
USERAUTH_SUCCESS (52). 
Message Exchange The message exchange involves the following steps. 
1. The client sends a SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST with a requested method 
of none. 
2. The server checks to determine if the user name is valid. If not, the server returns 
SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE with the partial success value of 
false. If the user name is valid, the server proceeds to step 3. 
3. The server returns SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_FAILURE with a list of one or more 
authentication methods to be used. 
4. The client selects one of the acceptable authentication methods and sends a 
SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_REQUEST with that method name and the required 
method-specific fields. At this point, there may be a sequence of exchanges to 
perform the method. 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 215 
5. If the authentication succeeds and more authentication methods are required, 
the server proceeds to step 3, using a partial success value of true. If the 
authentication fails, the server proceeds to step 3, using a partial success value 
of false. 
6. When all required authentication methods succeed, the server sends a 
SSH_MSG_USERAUTH_SUCCESS message, and the Authentication Protocol 
is over. 
Authentication Methods The server may require one or more of the following 
authentication methods. 
■■ publickey: The details of this method depend on the public-key algorithm 
chosen. In essence, the client sends a message to the server that contains 
the client’s public key, with the message signed by the client’s private key. 
When the server receives this message, it checks whether the supplied key 
is acceptable for authentication and, if so, it checks whether the signature is 
correct. 
■■ password: The client sends a message containing a plaintext password, which 
is protected by encryption by the Transport Layer Protocol. 
■■ hostbased: Authentication is performed on the client’s host rather than the 
client itself. Thus, a host that supports multiple clients would provide authentication 
for all its clients. This method works by having the client send a signature 
created with the private key of the client host. Thus, rather than directly 
verifying the user’s identity, the SSH server verifies the identity of the client 
host—and then believes the host when it says the user has already authenticated 
on the client side. 
Connection Protocol 
The SSH Connection Protocol runs on top of the SSH Transport Layer Protocol 
and assumes that a secure authentication connection is in use.2 That secure authentication 
connection, referred to as a tunnel, is used by the Connection Protocol to 
multiplex a number of logical channels. 
Channel Mechanism All types of communication using SSH, such as a terminal 
session, are supported using separate channels. Either side may open a channel. 
For each channel, each side associates a unique channel number, which need not be 
the same on both ends. Channels are flow controlled using a window mechanism. 
No data may be sent to a channel until a message is received to indicate that window 
space is available. 
2RFC 4254, The Secure Shell (SSH) Connection Protocol, states that the Connection Protocol runs on 
top of the Transport Layer Protocol and the User Authentication Protocol. RFC 4251, SSH Protocol 
Architecture, states that the Connection Protocol runs over the User Authentication Protocol. In fact, the 
Connection Protocol runs over the Transport Layer Protocol, but assumes that the User Authentication 
Protocol has been previously invoked. 

216 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
The life of a channel progresses through three stages: opening a channel, data 
transfer, and closing a channel. 
When either side wishes to open a new channel, it allocates a local number for 
the channel and then sends a message of the form: 
byte SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN 
string channel type 
uint32 sender channel 
uint32 initial window size 
uint32 maximum packet size 
.... channel type specific data follows 
where uint32 means unsigned 32-bit integer. The channel type identifies the application 
for this channel, as described subsequently. The sender channel is the local 
channel number. The initial window size specifies how many bytes of channel data 
can be sent to the sender of this message without adjusting the window. The maximum 
packet size specifies the maximum size of an individual data packet that can 
be sent to the sender. For example, one might want to use smaller packets for interactive 
connections to get better interactive response on slow links. 
If the remote side is able to open the channel, it returns a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_ 
OPEN_CONFIRMATION message, which includes the sender channel number, the 
recipient channel number, and window and packet size values for incoming 
traffic. 
Otherwise, the remote side returns a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN_FAILURE 
message 
with a reason code indicating the reason for failure. 
Once a channel is open, data transfer is performed using a SSH_MSG_ 
CHANNEL_DATA message, which includes the recipient channel number and a block 
of data. These messages, in both directions, may continue as long as the channel 
is open. 
When either side wishes to close a channel, it sends a SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_ 
CLOSE message, which includes the recipient channel number. 
Figure 6.11 provides an example of Connection Protocol Message Exchange. 
Channel Types Four channel types are recognized in the SSH Connection Protocol 
specification. 
■■ session: The remote execution of a program. The program may be a shell, an 
application such as file transfer or e-mail, a system command, or some built-in 
subsystem. Once a session channel is opened, subsequent requests are used to 
start the remote program. 
■■ x11: This refers to the X Window System, a computer software system and 
network 
protocol that provides a graphical user interface (GUI) for networked 
computers. X allows applications to run on a network server but to be 
displayed on a desktop machine. 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 217 
■■ forwarded-tcpip: This is remote port forwarding, as explained in the next 
subsection. 
■■ direct-tcpip: This is local port forwarding, as explained in the next subsection. 
Port Forwarding One of the most useful features of SSH is port forwarding. In 
essence, port forwarding provides the ability to convert any insecure TCP connection 
into a secure SSH connection. This is also referred to as SSH tunneling. We 
need to know what a port is in this context. A port is an identifier of a user of 
TCP. So, any application that runs on top of TCP has a port number. Incoming TCP 
traffic is delivered to the appropriate application on the basis of the port number. 
An application may employ multiple port numbers. For example, for the Simple 
Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), the server side generally listens on port 25, so an 
Figure 6.11 Example of SSH Connection Protocol Message Exchange 
Client Server 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN 
Open a 
channel 
Data 
transfer 
Close a 
channel 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_OPEN_CONFIRMATION 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_DATA 
SSH_MSG_CHANNEL_CLOSE 
Establish Authenticated Transport Layer Connection 

218 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
incoming SMTP request uses TCP and addresses the data to destination port 25. 
TCP recognizes that this is the SMTP server address and routes the data to the 
SMTP server application. 
Figure 6.12 illustrates the basic concept behind port forwarding. We have 
a client 
application that is identified by port number x and a server application 
identified 
by port number y. At some point, the client application invokes the local 
TCP entity and requests a connection to the remote server on port y. The local 
TCP entity negotiates a TCP connection with the remote TCP entity, such that the 
connection 
links local port x to remote port y. 
To secure this connection, SSH is configured so that the SSH Transport Layer 
Protocol establishes a TCP connection between the SSH client and server entities, 
with TCP port numbers a and b, respectively. A secure SSH tunnel is established 
Figure 6.12 SSH Transport Layer Packet Exchanges 
Client 
Server 
Client 
application 
Unsecure TCP connection 
(a) Connection via TCP 
TCP 
entity
x y
Server 
application 
TCP 
entity 
Client 
application 
Secure SSH tunnel 
(b) Connection via SSH tunnel 
SSH 
entity
x y
Server 
application 
SSH 
entity 
TCP Unsecure TCP connection 
entity 
a b
TCP 
entity 

6.4 / Secure Shell (SSH) 219 
over this TCP connection. Traffic from the client at port x is redirected to the local 
SSH entity and travels through the tunnel where the remote SSH entity delivers the 
data to the server application on port y. Traffic in the other direction is similarly 
redirected. 
SSH supports two types of port forwarding: local forwarding and remote forwarding. 
Local forwarding allows the client to set up a “hijacker” process. This will 
intercept selected application-level traffic and redirect it from an unsecured TCP 
connection to a secure SSH tunnel. SSH is configured to listen on selected ports. 
SSH grabs all traffic using a selected port and sends it through an SSH tunnel. On 
the other end, the SSH server sends the incoming traffic to the destination port dictated 
by the client application. 
The following example should help clarify local forwarding. Suppose you have 
an e-mail client on your desktop and use it to get e-mail from your mail server via 
the Post Office Protocol (POP). The assigned port number for POP3 is port 110. We 
can secure this traffic in the following way: 
1. The SSH client sets up a connection to the remote server. 
2. Select an unused local port number, say 9999, and configure SSH to accept 
traffic from this port destined for port 110 on the server. 
3. The SSH client informs the SSH server to create a connection to the destination, 
in this case mailserver port 110. 
4. The client takes any bits sent to local port 9999 and sends them to the server 
inside the encrypted SSH session. The SSH server decrypts the incoming bits 
and sends the plaintext to port 110. 
5. In the other direction, the SSH server takes any bits received on port 110 and 
sends them inside the SSH session back to the client, who decrypts and sends 
them to the process connected to port 9999. 
With remote forwarding, the user’s SSH client acts on the server’s behalf. 
The client receives traffic with a given destination port number, places the traffic 
on the correct port and sends it to the destination the user chooses. A typical 
example of remote forwarding is the following. You wish to access a server at 
work from your home computer. Because the work server is behind a firewall, it 
will not accept an SSH request from your home computer. However, from work 
you can set up an SSH tunnel using remote forwarding. This involves the following 
steps. 
1. From the work computer, set up an SSH connection to your home computer. 
The firewall will allow this, because it is a protected outgoing connection. 
2. Configure the SSH server to listen on a local port, say 22, and to deliver data 
across the SSH connection addressed to remote port, say 2222. 
3. You can now go to your home computer, and configure SSH to accept traffic 
on port 2222. 
4. You now have an SSH tunnel that can be used for remote logon to the work 
server. 

220 chapter 6 / Transport-Level Security 
6.5 Key Terms, Review Questions, And Problems 
Key Terms 
Alert protocol 
Change Cipher Spec protocol 
Handshake protocol 
HTTPS (HTTP over SSL) 
Master Secret 
Secure Shell (SSH) 
Secure Socket Layer (SSL) 
Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) 
Review Questions 
6.1 What are the advantages of each of the three approaches shown in Figure 6.1? 
6.2 What protocols comprise TLS? 
6.3 What is the difference between a TLS connection and a TLS session? 
6.4 List and briefly define the parameters that define a TLS session state. 
6.5 List and briefly define the parameters that define a TLS session connection. 
6.6 What services are provided by the TLS Record Protocol? 
6.7 What steps are involved in the TLS Record Protocol transmission? 
6.8 Give brief details about different levels of awareness of a connection in HTTPS. 
6.9 Which protocol was replaced by SSH and why? Which version is currently in the 
process 
of being standardized? 
6.10 List and briefly define the SSH protocols. 
Problems 
6.1 In SSL and TLS, why is there a separate Change Cipher Spec Protocol rather than 
including a change_cipher_spec message in the Handshake Protocol? 
6.2 What purpose does the MAC serve during the change cipher spec TLS exchange? 
6.3 Consider the following threats to Web security and describe how each is countered by 
a particular feature of TLS. 
a. Brute-Force Cryptanalytic Attack: An exhaustive search of the key space for a 
conventional encryption algorithm. 
b. Known Plaintext Dictionary Attack: Many messages will contain predictable 
plaintext, such as the HTTP GET command. An attacker constructs a dictionary 
containing every possible encryption of the known-plaintext message. When 
an encrypted message is intercepted, the attacker takes the portion containing 
the encrypted known plaintext and looks up the ciphertext in the dictionary. The 
ciphertext should match against an entry that was encrypted with the same secret 
key. If there are several matches, each of these can be tried against the full ciphertext 
to determine the right one. This attack is especially effective against small key 
sizes (e.g., 40-bit keys). 
c. Replay Attack: Earlier TLS handshake messages are replayed. 
d. Man-in-the-Middle Attack: An attacker interposes during key exchange, acting as 
the client to the server and as the server to the client. 
e. Password Sniffing: Passwords in HTTP or other application traffic are eavesdropped. 
f. IP Spoofing: Uses forged IP addresses to fool a host into accepting bogus data. 

6.5 / Key Terms, Review Quest ions, And Problems 221 
g. IP Hijacking: An active, authenticated connection between two hosts is disrupted 
and the attacker takes the place of one of the hosts. 
h. SYN Flooding: An attacker sends TCP SYN messages to request a connection 
but does not respond to the final message to establish the connection fully. The 
attacked 
TCP module typically leaves the “half-open connection” around for a few 
minutes. Repeated SYN messages can clog the TCP module. 
6.4 Based on what you have learned in this chapter, is it possible in TLS for the receiver 
to reorder TLS record blocks that arrive out of order? If so, explain how it can be 
done. If not, why not? 
6.5 For SSH packets, what is the advantage, if any, of not including the MAC in the scope 
of the packet encryption? 

