17 
Introduction 
1.1 Computer Security Concepts 
A Definition of Computer Security 
Examples 
The Challenges of Computer Security 
1.2 The OSI Security Architecture 
1.3 Security Attacks 
Passive Attacks 
Active Attacks 
1.4 Security Services 
Authentication 
Access Control 
Data Confidentiality 
Data Integrity 
Nonrepudiation 
Availability Service 
1.5 Security Mechanisms 
1.6 Fundamental Security Design Principles 
1.7 Attack Surfaces and Attack Trees 
Attack Surfaces 
Attack Trees 
1.8 A Model for Network Security 
1.9 Standards 
1.10 Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 
Chapter 

18 chapter 1 / Introduction 
The requirements of information security within an organization have undergone two 
major changes in the last several decades. Before the widespread use of data processing 
equipment, the security of information felt to be valuable to an organization was 
provided primarily by physical and administrative means. An example of the former 
is the use of rugged filing cabinets with a combination lock for storing sensitive documents. 
An example of the latter is personnel screening procedures used during the 
hiring process. 
With the introduction of the computer, the need for automated tools for protecting 
files and other information stored on the computer became evident. This 
is especially the case for a shared system, such as a time-sharing system, and the 
need is even more acute for systems that can be accessed over a public telephone 
network, data network, or the Internet. The generic name for the collection of tools 
designed to protect data and to thwart hackers is computer security. 
The second major change that affected security is the introduction of distributed 
systems and the use of networks and communications facilities for carrying 
data between terminal user and computer and between computer and computer. 
Network security measures are needed to protect data during their transmission. In 
fact, the term network security is somewhat misleading, because virtually all business, 
government, and academic organizations interconnect their data processing 
equipment with a collection of interconnected networks. Such a collection is often 
referred to as an internet,1 and the term internet security is used. 
1We use the term internet with a lowercase “i” to refer to any interconnected collection of network. 
A corporate 
intranet is an example of an internet. The Internet with a capital “I” may be one of the facilities 
used by an organization to construct its internet. 
Learning Objectives 
After studying this chapter, you should be able to: 
◆◆ Describe the key security requirements of confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability. 
◆◆ Describe the X.800 security architecture for OSI. 
◆◆ Discuss the types of security threats and attacks that must be dealt with 
and give examples of the types of threats and attacks that apply to different 
categories of computer and network assets. 
◆◆ Explain the fundamental security design principles. 
◆◆ Discuss the use of attack surfaces and attack trees. 
◆◆ List and briefly describe key organizations involved in cryptography standards. 

chapter 1 / Introduction 19 
There are no clear boundaries between these two forms of security. For example, 
a computer virus may be introduced into a system physically when it arrives 
on a flash drive or an optical disk and is subsequently loaded onto a computer. 
Viruses 
may also arrive over an internet. In either case, once the virus is resident 
on a computer system, internal computer security tools are needed to detect and 
recover from the virus. 
This book focuses on internet security, which consists of measures to deter, 
prevent, detect, and correct security violations that involve the transmission of 
information. 
That is a broad statement that covers a host of possibilities. To give 
you a feel for the areas covered in this book, consider the following examples of 
security violations: 
1. User A transmits a file to user B. The file contains sensitive information (e.g., 
payroll records) that is to be protected from disclosure. User C, who is not 
authorized 
to read the file, is able to monitor the transmission and capture a 
copy of the file during its transmission. 
2. A network manager, D, transmits a message to a computer, E, under its management. 
The message instructs computer E to update an authorization file 
to include the identities of a number of new users who are to be given access 
to that computer. User F intercepts the message, alters its contents to add or 
delete entries, and then forwards the message to E, which accepts the message 
as coming from manager D and updates its authorization file accordingly. 
3. Rather than intercept a message, user F constructs its own message with 
the desired 
entries and transmits that message to E as if it had come from 
manager 
D. Computer E accepts the message as coming from manager D and 
updates 
its authorization file accordingly. 
4. An employee is fired without warning. The personnel manager sends a message 
to a server system to invalidate the employee’s account. When the invalidation 
is accomplished, the server is to post a notice to the employee’s file as 
confirmation of the action. The employee is able to intercept the message and 
delay it long enough to make a final access to the server to retrieve sensitive 
information. The message is then forwarded, the action taken, and the confirmation 
posted. The employee’s action may go unnoticed for some considerable 
time. 
5. A message is sent from a customer to a stockbroker with instructions for various 
transactions. Subsequently, the investments lose value and the customer 
denies sending the message. 
Although this list by no means exhausts the possible types of security violations, it 
illustrates 
the range of concerns of network security. 
This chapter provides a general overview of the subject matter that structures 
the material in the remainder of the book. We begin with a general discussion 
of network security services and mechanisms and of the types of attacks they are 
designed 
for. Then we develop a general overall model within which the security 
services and mechanisms can be viewed. 

20 chapter 1 / Introduction 
1.1 Co mputer Security Co ncepts 
A Definition of Computer Security 
The NIST Computer Security Handbook [NIST95] defines the term computer security 
as 
Computer Security: The protection afforded to an automated information system 
in order to attain the applicable objectives of preserving the integrity, availability, 
and confidentiality of information system resources (includes hardware, 
software, firmware, information/data, and telecommunications). 
This definition introduces three key objectives that are at the heart of computer 
security. 
■ ■ Confidentiality: This term covers two related concepts: 
Data2 confidentiality: Assures that private or confidential information is 
not made available or disclosed to unauthorized individuals. 
Privacy: Assures that individuals control or influence what information 
related 
to them may be collected and stored and by whom and to whom 
that information may be disclosed. 
■ ■ Integrity: This term covers two related concepts: 
Data integrity: Assures that data (both stored and in transmitted packets) 
and programs are changed only in a specified and authorized manner. 
System integrity: Assures that a system performs its intended function in 
an unimpaired manner, free from deliberate or inadvertent unauthorized 
manipulation 
of the system. 
■ ■ Availability: Assures that systems work promptly and service is not denied to 
authorized users. 
These three concepts form what is often referred to as the CIA triad. The 
three concepts embody the fundamental security objectives for both data and for 
information and computing services. For example, the NIST Standards for Security 
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems (FIPS 199) lists 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability as the three security objectives for information 
and for information systems. FIPS 199 provides a useful characterization of 
these three objectives in terms of requirements and the definition of a loss of security 
in each category. 
■ ■ Confidentiality: Preserving authorized restrictions on information access and 
disclosure, including means for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information. 
A loss of confidentiality is the unauthorized disclosure of information. 
2RFC 4949 defines information as “facts and ideas, which can be represented (encoded) as various forms 
of data,” and data as “information in a specific physical representation, usually a sequence of symbols 
that have meaning; especially a representation of information that can be processed or produced by a 
computer.” Security literature typically does not make much of a distinction, nor does this book. 

1.1 / Computer Security Concepts 21 
■ ■ Integrity: Guarding against improper information modification or destruction, 
including ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity. A loss of integrity 
is the unauthorized modification or destruction of information. 
■ ■ Availability: Ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information. 
A loss of availability is the disruption of access to or use of information or an 
information system. 
Although the use of the CIA triad to define security objectives is well established, 
some in the security field feel that additional concepts are needed to present 
a complete picture (Figure 1.1). Two of the most commonly mentioned are 
■ ■ Authenticity: The property of being genuine and being able to be verified and 
trusted; confidence in the validity of a transmission, a message, or message 
originator. This means verifying that users are who they say they are and that 
each input arriving at the system came from a trusted source. 
■ ■ Accountability: The security goal that generates the requirement for actions 
of an entity to be traced uniquely to that entity. This supports nonrepudiation, 
deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention, and after-action 
recovery and legal action. Because truly secure systems are not yet an achievable 
goal, we must be able to trace a security breach to a responsible party. 
Systems must keep records of their activities to permit later forensic analysis 
to trace security breaches or to aid in transaction disputes. 
Examples 
We now provide some examples of applications that illustrate the requirements just 
enumerated.3 For these examples, we use three levels of impact on organizations or 
individuals should there be a breach of security (i.e., a loss of confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability). These levels are defined in FIPS 199: 
■ ■ Low: The loss could be expected to have a limited adverse effect on organizational 
operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A limited adverse effect 
means that, for example, the loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability might 
3These examples are taken from a security policy document published by the Information Technology 
Security and Privacy Office at Purdue University. 
Figure 1.1 Essential Network and Computer 
Security Requirements 
Data 
and 
services 
Availability 
Integrity 
Accountability 
Authenticity 
Condentiality 

22 chapter 1 / Introduction 
(i) cause a degradation in mission capability to an extent and duration that the 
organization is able to perform its primary functions, but the effectiveness of the 
functions is noticeably reduced; (ii) result in minor damage to organizational 
assets; (iii) result in minor financial loss; or (iv) result in minor harm to individuals. 
■ ■ Moderate: The loss could be expected to have a serious adverse effect on organizational 
operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A serious adverse 
effect means that, for example, the loss might (i) cause a significant degradation 
in mission capability to an extent and duration that the organization is 
able to perform its primary functions, but the effectiveness of the functions is 
significantly reduced; (ii) result in significant damage to organizational assets; 
(iii) result in significant financial loss; or (iv) result in significant 
harm to individuals 
that does not involve loss of life or serious, life-threatening injuries. 
■ ■ High: The loss could be expected to have a severe or catastrophic adverse effect 
on organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals. A severe or 
catastrophic adverse effect means that, for example, the loss might (i) cause 
a severe degradation in or loss of mission capability to an extent and duration 
that the organization is not able to perform one or more of its primary 
functions; (ii) result in major damage to organizational assets; (iii) result in 
major financial loss; or (iv) result in severe or catastrophic harm to individuals 
involving loss of life or serious, life-threatening injuries. 
Confidentiality Student grade information is an asset whose confidentiality is 
considered to be highly important by students. In the United States, the release of 
such information is regulated by the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA). Grade information should only be available to students, their parents, 
and employees that require the information to do their job. Student enrollment 
information may have a moderate confidentiality rating. While still covered by 
FERPA, this information is seen by more people on a daily basis, is less likely to be 
targeted than grade information, and results in less damage if disclosed. Directory 
information (such as lists of students, faculty, or departmental lists) may be assigned 
a low confidentiality rating or indeed no rating. This information is typically freely 
available to the public and published on a school’s Web site. 
Integrity Several aspects of integrity are illustrated by the example of a hospital 
patient’s allergy information stored in a database. The doctor should be able to 
trust that the information is correct and current. Now suppose that an employee 
(e.g., a nurse) who is authorized to view and update this information deliberately 
falsifies the data to cause harm to the hospital. The database needs to be restored 
to a trusted basis quickly, and it should be possible to trace the error back to the 
person responsible. Patient allergy information is an example of an asset with a high 
requirement for integrity. Inaccurate information could result in serious harm or 
death to a patient and expose the hospital to massive liability. 
An example of an asset that may be assigned a moderate level of integrity 
requirement is a Web site that offers a forum to registered users to discuss some 
specific topic. Either a registered user or a hacker could falsify some entries or 
deface the Web site. If the forum exists only for the enjoyment of the users, brings 
in little or no advertising revenue, and is not used for something important such 

1.1 / Computer Security Concepts 23 
as research, then potential damage is not severe. The Web master may experience 
some data, financial, and time loss. 
An example of a low-integrity requirement is an anonymous online poll. Many 
Web sites, such as news organizations, offer these polls to their users with very few 
safeguards. However, the inaccuracy and unscientific nature of such polls are well 
understood. 
Availability The more critical a component or service, the higher is the level of 
availability required. Consider a system that provides authentication services for 
critical systems, applications, and devices. An interruption of service results in the 
inability for customers to access computing resources and for the staff to access the 
resources they need to perform critical tasks. The loss of the service translates into 
a large financial loss due to lost employee productivity and potential customer 
loss. 
An example of an asset that typically would be rated as having a moderate 
availability requirement is a public Web site for a university; the Web site provides 
information for current and prospective students and donors. Such a site is not a 
critical component of the university’s information system, but its unavailability will 
cause some embarrassment. 
An online telephone directory lookup application would be classified as a lowavailability 
requirement. Although the temporary loss of the application may be 
an annoyance, there are other ways to access the information, such as a hardcopy 
directory or the operator. 
The Challenges of Computer Security 
Computer and network security is both fascinating and complex. Some of the reasons 
include: 
1. Security is not as simple as it might first appear to the novice. The requirements 
seem to be straightforward; indeed, most of the major requirements for 
security services can be given self-explanatory, one-word labels: confidentiality, 
authentication, nonrepudiation, and integrity. But the mechanisms used to 
meet those requirements can be quite complex, and understanding them may 
involve rather subtle reasoning. 
2. In developing a particular security mechanism or algorithm, one must always 
consider potential attacks on those security features. In many cases, successful 
attacks are designed by looking at the problem in a completely different way, 
therefore exploiting an unexpected weakness in the mechanism. 
3. Because of point 2, the procedures used to provide particular services are 
often counterintuitive. Typically, a security mechanism is complex, and it is not 
obvious from the statement of a particular requirement that such elaborate 
measures are needed. It is only when the various aspects of the threat are considered 
that elaborate security mechanisms make sense. 
4. Having designed various security mechanisms, it is necessary to decide where 
to use them. This is true both in terms of physical placement (e.g., at what points 
in a network are certain security mechanisms needed) and in a logical sense 
[e.g., at what layer or layers of an architecture such as TCP/IP (Transmission 
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) should mechanisms be placed]. 

24 chapter 1 / Introduction 
5. Security mechanisms typically involve more than a particular algorithm or protocol. 
They also require that participants be in possession of some secret information 
(e.g., an encryption key), which raises questions about the creation, 
distribution, and protection of that secret information. There also may be a reliance 
on communications protocols whose behavior may complicate the task of 
developing the security mechanism. For example, if the proper functioning of 
the security mechanism requires setting time limits on the transit time of a 
message from sender to receiver, then any protocol or network that introduces 
variable, unpredictable delays may render such time limits meaningless. 
6. Computer and network security is essentially a battle of wits between a perpetrator 
who tries to find holes and the designer or administrator who tries to 
close them. The great advantage that the attacker has is that he or she need 
only find a single weakness, while the designer must find and eliminate all 
weaknesses to achieve perfect security. 
7. There is a natural tendency on the part of users and system managers to 
perceive 
little benefit from security investment until a security failure occurs. 
8. Security requires regular, even constant, monitoring, and this is difficult in 
today’s 
short-term, overloaded environment. 
9. Security is still too often an afterthought to be incorporated into a system after 
the design is complete rather than being an integral part of the design process. 
10. Many users (and even security administrators) view strong security as an 
impediment 
to efficient and user-friendly operation of an information system 
or use of information. 
The difficulties just enumerated will be encountered in numerous ways as we 
examine the various security threats and mechanisms throughout this book. 
1.2 T he Osi Security Architecture 
To assess effectively the security needs of an organization and to evaluate and 
choose various security products and policies, the manager responsible for computer 
and network security needs some systematic way of defining the requirements 
for security and characterizing the approaches to satisfying those requirements. 
This is difficult enough in a centralized data processing environment; with the use of 
local and wide area networks, the problems are compounded. 
ITU-T4 Recommendation X.800, Security Architecture for OSI, defines such a 
systematic approach.5 The OSI security architecture is useful to managers as a way 
of organizing the task of providing security. Furthermore, because this architecture 
4The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) 
is a United Nations-sponsored agency that develops standards, called Recommendations, relating to 
telecommunications 
and to open systems interconnection (OSI). 
5The OSI security architecture was developed in the context of the OSI protocol architecture, which is 
described in Appendix D. However, for our purposes in this chapter, an understanding of the OSI protocol 
architecture is not required. 

1.3 / Security Attacks 25 
was developed as an international standard, computer and communications vendors 
have developed security features for their products and services that relate to this 
structured definition of services and mechanisms. 
For our purposes, the OSI security architecture provides a useful, if abstract, overview 
of many of the concepts that this book deals with. The OSI security architecture 
focuses on security attacks, mechanisms, and services. These can be defined briefly as 
■ ■ Security attack: Any action that compromises the security of information 
owned by an organization. 
■ ■ Security mechanism: A process (or a device incorporating such a process) that 
is designed to detect, prevent, or recover from a security attack. 
■ ■ Security service: A processing or communication service that enhances the 
security of the data processing systems and the information transfers of an 
organization. The services are intended to counter security attacks, and they 
make use of one or more security mechanisms to provide the service. 
In the literature, the terms threat and attack are commonly used to mean more 
or less the same thing. Table 1.1 provides definitions taken from RFC 4949, Internet 
Security Glossary. 
1.3 S ecurity Attacks 
A useful means of classifying security attacks, used both in X.800 and RFC 4949, is 
in terms of passive attacks and active attacks. A passive attack attempts to learn or 
make use of information from the system but does not affect system resources. An 
active attack attempts to alter system resources or affect their operation. 
Passive Attacks 
Passive attacks (Figure 1.2a) are in the nature of eavesdropping on, or monitoring 
of, transmissions. The goal of the opponent is to obtain information that is being 
transmitted. Two types of passive attacks are the release of message contents and 
traffic analysis. 
The release of message contents is easily understood. A telephone conversation, 
an electronic mail message, and a transferred file may contain sensitive or 
confidential information. We would like to prevent an opponent from learning the 
contents of these transmissions. 
Threat 
A potential for violation of security, which exists when there is a circumstance, capability, action, 
or event that could breach security and cause harm. That is, a threat is a possible danger that might 
exploit a vulnerability. 
Attack 
An assault on system security that derives from an intelligent threat. That is, an intelligent act that 
is a deliberate attempt (especially in the sense of a method or technique) to evade security services 
and violate the security policy of a system. 
Table 1.1 Threats and Attacks (RFC 4949) 

26 chapter 1 / Introduction 
A second type of passive attack, traffic analysis, is subtler. Suppose that we 
had a way of masking the contents of messages or other information traffic so that 
opponents, even if they captured the message, could not extract the information 
from the message. The common technique for masking contents is encryption. If we 
had encryption protection in place, an opponent still might be able to observe the 
pattern of these messages. The opponent could determine the location and identity 
of communicating hosts and could observe the frequency and length of messages 
being exchanged. This information might be useful in guessing the nature of the 
communication that was taking place. 
Passive attacks are very difficult to detect, because they do not involve any 
alteration of the data. Typically, the message traffic is sent and received in an 
Figure 1.2 Security Attacks 
(a) Passive attacks 
Alice 
(b) Active attacks 
Bob 
Darth 
Bob 
Darth 
Alice 
Internet or 
other comms facility 
Internet or 
other comms facility 
1 2 
3 

1.4 / Security Services 27 
apparently normal fashion, and neither the sender nor the receiver is aware that 
a third party has read the messages or observed the traffic pattern. However, it is 
feasible to prevent the success of these attacks, usually by means of encryption. 
Thus, the emphasis in dealing with passive attacks is on prevention rather than 
detection. 
Active Attacks 
Active attacks (Figure 1.2b) involve some modification of the data stream or the 
creation of a false stream and can be subdivided into four categories: masquerade, 
replay, modification of messages, and denial of service. 
A masquerade takes place when one entity pretends to be a different entity 
(path 2 of Figure 1.2b is active). A masquerade attack usually includes one of the 
other forms of active attack. For example, authentication sequences can be captured 
and replayed after a valid authentication sequence has taken place, thus enabling an 
authorized entity with few privileges to obtain extra privileges by impersonating an 
entity that has those privileges. 
Replay involves the passive capture of a data unit and its subsequent retransmission 
to produce an unauthorized effect (paths 1, 2, and 3 active). 
Modification of messages simply means that some portion of a legitimate message 
is altered, or that messages are delayed or reordered, to produce an unauthorized 
effect (paths 1 and 2 active). For example, a message meaning “Allow John 
Smith to read confidential file accounts” is modified to mean “Allow Fred Brown 
to read confidential file accounts.” 
The denial of service prevents or inhibits the normal use or management of 
communications facilities (path 3 active). This attack may have a specific target; for 
example, an entity may suppress all messages directed to a particular destination 
(e.g., the security audit service). Another form of service denial is the disruption of 
an entire network—either by disabling the network or by overloading it with messages 
so as to degrade performance. 
Active attacks present the opposite characteristics of passive attacks. Whereas 
passive attacks are difficult to detect, measures are available to prevent their success. 
On the other hand, it is quite difficult to prevent active attacks absolutely because 
of the wide variety of potential physical, software, and network vulnerabilities. 
Instead, the goal is to detect active attacks and to recover from any disruption or 
delays caused by them. If the detection has a deterrent effect, it also may contribute 
to prevention. 
1.4 S ecurity Services 
X.800 defines a security service as a service that is provided by a protocol layer of 
communicating open systems and that ensures adequate security of the systems or 
of data transfers. Perhaps a clearer definition is found in RFC 4949, which provides 
the following definition: A processing or communication service that is provided by 

28 chapter 1 / Introduction 
a system to give a specific kind of protection to system resources; security services 
implement security policies and are implemented by security mechanisms. 
X.800 divides these services into five categories and fourteen specific services 
(Table 1.2). We look at each category in turn.6 
6There is no universal agreement about many of the terms used in the security literature. For example, the 
term integrity is sometimes used to refer to all aspects of information security. The term authentication is 
sometimes used to refer both to verification of identity and to the various functions listed under integrity 
in this chapter. Our usage here agrees with both X.800 and RFC 4949. 
Auth entication 
The assurance that the communicating entity is the 
one that it claims to be. 
Peer Entity Authentication 
Used in association with a logical connection to 
provide confidence in the identity of the entities connected. 
Data-Origin Authentication 
In a connectionless transfer, provides assurance that 
the source of received data is as claimed. 
Acc ess Control 
The prevention of unauthorized use of a resource 
(i.e., this service controls who can have access to a 
resource, under what conditions access can occur, 
and what those accessing the resource are allowed 
to do). 
Data Confid entialit y 
The protection of data from unauthorized disclosure. 
Connection Confidentiality 
The protection of all user data on a connection. 
Connectionless Confidentiality 
The protection of all user data in a single data block. 
Selective-Field Confidentiality 
The confidentiality of selected fields within the user 
data on a connection or in a single data block. 
Traffic-Flow Confidentiality 
The protection of the information that might be 
derived from observation of traffic flows. 
Data Int egrit y 
The assurance that data received are exactly 
as sent by an authorized entity (i.e., contain no 
modification, 
insertion, deletion, or replay). 
Connection Integrity with Recovery 
Provides for the integrity of all user data on a 
connection 
and detects any modification, insertion, 
deletion, or replay of any data within an entire data 
sequence, with recovery attempted. 
Connection Integrity without Recovery 
As above, but provides only detection without recovery. 
Selective-Field Connection Integrity 
Provides for the integrity of selected fields within the 
user data of a data block transferred over a connection 
and takes the form of determination of whether 
the selected fields have been modified, inserted, 
deleted, or replayed. 
Connectionless Integrity 
Provides for the integrity of a single connectionless 
data block and may take the form of detection of 
data modification. Additionally, a limited form of 
replay detection may be provided. 
Selective-Field Connectionless Integrity 
Provides for the integrity of selected fields within a 
single connectionless data block; takes the form of 
determination of whether the selected fields have 
been modified.
Nonr epudiation 
Provides protection against denial by one of the 
entities involved in a communication of having 
participated 
in all or part of the communication. 
Nonrepudiation, Origin 
Proof that the message was sent by the specified 
party. 
Nonrepudiation, Destination 
Proof that the message was received by the specified 
party. 
Table 1.2 Security Services (X.800) 

1.4 / Security Services 29 
Authentication 
The authentication service is concerned with assuring that a communication is 
authentic. 
In the case of a single message, such as a warning or alarm signal, the 
function of the authentication service is to assure the recipient that the message 
is from the source that it claims to be from. In the case of an ongoing interaction, 
such as the connection of a terminal to a host, two aspects are involved. First, at the 
time of connection initiation, the service assures that the two entities are authentic 
(i.e., that each is the entity that it claims to be). Second, the service must assure that 
the connection is not interfered with in such a way that a third party can masquerade 
as one of the two legitimate parties for the purposes of unauthorized transmission 
or reception. 
Two specific authentication services are defined in X.800: 
■ ■ Peer entity authentication: Provides for the corroboration of the identity of a 
peer entity in an association. Two entities are considered peers if they implement 
the same protocol in different systems (e.g., two TCP modules in two 
communicating systems). Peer entity authentication is provided for use at the 
establishment of or during the data transfer phase of a connection. It attempts 
to provide confidence that an entity is not performing either a masquerade or 
an unauthorized replay of a previous connection. 
■ ■ Data origin authentication: Provides for the corroboration of the source of a 
data unit. It does not provide protection against the duplication or modification 
of data units. This type of service supports applications like electronic 
mail, where there are no prior interactions between the communicating 
entities. 
Access Control 
In the context of network security, access control is the ability to limit and control 
the access to host systems and applications via communications links. To achieve 
this, each entity trying to gain access must first be identified, or authenticated, so 
that access rights can be tailored to the individual. 
Data Confidentiality 
Confidentiality is the protection of transmitted data from passive attacks. With respect 
to the content of a data transmission, several levels of protection can be identified. 
The broadest service protects all user data transmitted between two users 
over a period of time. For example, when a TCP connection is set up between two 
systems, this broad protection prevents the release of any user data transmitted over 
the TCP connection. Narrower forms of this service can also be defined, including 
the protection of a single message or even specific fields within a message. These 
refinements are less useful than the broad approach and may even be more complex 
and expensive to implement. 
The other aspect of confidentiality is the protection of traffic flow from 
analysis. 
This requires that an attacker not be able to observe the source and destination, 
frequency, length, or other characteristics of the traffic on a communications 
facility. 

30 chapter 1 / Introduction 
Data Integrity 
As with confidentiality, integrity can apply to a stream of messages, a single message, 
or selected fields within a message. Again, the most useful and straightforward 
approach is total stream protection. 
A connection-oriented integrity service deals with a stream of messages 
and assures that messages are received as sent with no duplication, insertion, 
modification, reordering, or replays. The destruction of data is also covered 
under this service. Thus, the connection-oriented integrity service addresses 
both message stream modification and denial of service. On the other hand, a 
connectionless integrity service deals with individual messages without regard to 
any larger context and generally provides protection against message modification 
only. 
We can make a distinction between service with and without recovery. Because 
the integrity service relates to active attacks, we are concerned with detection rather 
than prevention. If a violation of integrity is detected, then the service may simply 
report this violation, and some other portion of software or human intervention is 
required to recover from the violation. Alternatively, there are mechanisms available 
to recover from the loss of integrity of data, as we will review subsequently. 
The incorporation of automated recovery mechanisms is typically the more attractive 
alternative. 
Nonrepudiation 
Nonrepudiation prevents either sender or receiver from denying a transmitted message. 
Thus, when a message is sent, the receiver can prove that the alleged sender in 
fact sent the message. Similarly, when a message is received, the sender can prove 
that the alleged receiver in fact received the message. 
Availability Service 
Both X.800 and RFC 4949 define availability to be the property of a system or a 
system resource being accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized system 
entity, according to performance specifications for the system (i.e., a system 
is available if it provides services according to the system design whenever users 
request them). A variety of attacks can result in the loss of or reduction in availability. 
Some of these attacks are amenable to automated countermeasures, such 
as authentication and encryption, whereas others require some sort of physical 
action to prevent or recover from loss of availability of elements of a distributed 
system. 
X.800 treats availability as a property to be associated with various security 
services. However, it makes sense to call out specifically an availability service. An 
availability service is one that protects a system to ensure its availability. This service 
addresses the security concerns raised by denial-of-service attacks. It depends 
on proper management and control of system resources and thus depends on access 
control service and other security services. 

1.5 / Security Mechanis ms 31 
Specific Securit y Mechanisms 
May be incorporated into the appropriate protocol 
layer in order to provide some of the OSI security 
services. 
Encipherment 
The use of mathematical algorithms to transform 
data into a form that is not readily intelligible. The 
transformation and subsequent recovery of the data 
depend on an algorithm and zero or more encryption 
keys. 
Digital Signature 
Data appended to, or a cryptographic transformation 
of, a data unit that allows a recipient of the data unit 
to prove the source and integrity of the data unit and 
protect against forgery (e.g., by the recipient). 
Access Control 
A variety of mechanisms that enforce access rights to 
resources. 
Data Integrity 
A variety of mechanisms used to assure the integrity 
of a data unit or stream of data units. 
Authentication Exchange 
A mechanism intended to ensure the identity of an 
entity by means of information exchange. 
Traffic Padding 
The insertion of bits into gaps in a data stream to 
frustrate traffic analysis attempts. 
Routing Control 
Enables selection of particular physically secure 
routes for certain data and allows routing changes, 
especially when a breach of security is suspected. 
Notarization 
The use of a trusted third party to assure certain 
properties of a data exchange. 
Pervasi ve Securit y Mechanisms 
Mechanisms that are not specific to any particular 
OSI security service or protocol layer. 
Trusted Functionality 
That which is perceived to be correct with respect 
to some criteria (e.g., as established by a security 
policy). 
Security Label 
The marking bound to a resource (which may be 
a data unit) that names or designates the security 
attributes 
of that resource. 
Event Detection 
Detection of security-relevant events. 
Security Audit Trail 
Data collected and potentially used to facilitate a 
security audit, which is an independent review and 
examination of system records and activities. 
Security Recovery 
Deals with requests from mechanisms, such as event 
handling and management functions, and takes 
recovery actions. 
Table 1.3 Security Mechanisms (X.800) 
1.5 S ecurity Mechanisms 
Table 1.3 lists the security mechanisms defined in X.800. The mechanisms are divided 
into those that are implemented in a specific protocol layer, such as TCP 
or an application-layer protocol, and those that are not specific to any particular 
protocol layer or security service. These mechanisms will be covered in the appropriate 
places in the book, so we do not elaborate now except to comment on the 

32 chapter 1 / Introduction 
definition of encipherment. X.800 distinguishes between reversible encipherment 
mechanisms and irreversible encipherment mechanisms. A reversible encipherment 
mechanism 
is simply an encryption algorithm that allows data to be encrypted and 
subsequently decrypted. Irreversible encipherment mechanisms include hash algorithms 
and message authentication codes, which are used in digital signature and 
message authentication 
applications. 
Table 1.4, based on one in X.800, indicates the relationship between security 
services and security mechanisms. 
1.6 Fundamental Security Design Principles 
Despite years of research and development, it has not been possible to develop 
security design and implementation techniques that systematically exclude security 
flaws and prevent all unauthorized actions. In the absence of such foolproof techniques, 
it is useful to have a set of widely agreed design principles that can guide 
the development of protection mechanisms. The National Centers of Academic 
Excellence in Information Assurance/Cyber Defense, which is jointly sponsored by 
the U.S. National Security Agency and the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, 
list the following as fundamental security design principles [NCAE13]: 
■ ■ Economy of mechanism 
■ ■ Fail-safe defaults 
■ ■ Complete mediation 
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y 
Y
Y
Y
Y 
Y 
Y
Y
Y 
Y
Y 
Y 
Y
Y 
Y 
Peer entity authentication 
Service 
Mechanism 
Encipherment 
Digital signature 
Access control 
Data integrity
Authentication exchange 
Trac padding 
Routing control 
Notarization 
Data origin authentication 
Access control 
Condentiality 
Trac ow condentiality 
Data integrity 
Nonrepudiation 
Availability 
Table 1.4 Relationship between Security Services and Mechanisms 

1.6 / Fundamental Security Desi gn Principles 33 
■ ■ Open design 
■ ■ Separation of privilege 
■ ■ Least privilege 
■ ■ Least common mechanism 
■ ■ Psychological acceptability 
■ ■ Isolation 
■ ■ Encapsulation 
■ ■ Modularity 
■ ■ Layering 
■ ■ Least astonishment 
The first eight listed principles were initially proposed in [SALT75] and have 
withstood the test of time. In this section, we briefly discuss each principle. 
Economy of mechanism means that the design of security measures embodied 
in both hardware and software should be as simple and small as possible. The 
motivation for this principle is that relatively simple, small design is easier to test 
and verify thoroughly. With a complex design, there are many more opportunities 
for an adversary to discover subtle weaknesses to exploit that may be difficult 
to spot ahead of time. The more complex the mechanism, the more likely it is to 
possess exploitable flaws. Simple mechanisms tend to have fewer exploitable flaws 
and require less maintenance. Further, because configuration management issues 
are simplified, updating or replacing a simple mechanism becomes a less intensive 
process. 
In practice, this is perhaps the most difficult principle to honor. There is a 
constant demand for new features in both hardware and software, complicating the 
security design task. The best that can be done is to keep this principle in mind during 
system design to try to eliminate unnecessary complexity. 
Fail-safe default means that access decisions should be based on permission 
rather than exclusion. That is, the default situation is lack of access, and the protection 
scheme identifies conditions under which access is permitted. This approach 
exhibits a better failure mode than the alternative approach, where the default is 
to permit access. A design or implementation mistake in a mechanism that gives 
explicit permission tends to fail by refusing permission, a safe situation that can 
be quickly detected. On the other hand, a design or implementation mistake in a 
mechanism that explicitly excludes access tends to fail by allowing access, a failure 
that may long go unnoticed in normal use. For example, most file access systems 
work on this principle and virtually all protected services on client/server systems 
work this way. 
Complete mediation means that every access must be checked against the 
access control mechanism. Systems should not rely on access decisions retrieved 
from a cache. In a system designed to operate continuously, this principle requires 
that, if access decisions are remembered for future use, careful consideration should 
be given to how changes in authority are propagated into such local memories. File 
access systems appear to provide an example of a system that complies with this 
principle. However, typically, once a user has opened a file, no check is made to see 
if permissions change. To fully implement complete mediation, every time a user 

34 chapter 1 / Introduction 
reads a field or record in a file, or a data item in a database, the system must exercise 
access control. This resource-intensive approach is rarely used. 
Open design means that the design of a security mechanism should be open 
rather than secret. For example, although encryption keys must be secret, encryption 
algorithms should be open to public scrutiny. The algorithms can then be 
reviewed by many experts, and users can therefore have high confidence in them. 
This is the philosophy behind the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) program of standardizing encryption and hash algorithms and has led to the 
widespread adoption of NIST-approved algorithms. 
Separation of privilege is defined in [SALT75] as a practice in which multiple 
privilege attributes are required to achieve access to a restricted resource. A good 
example of this is multifactor user authentication, which requires the use of multiple 
techniques, such as a password and a smart card, to authorize a user. The term is 
also now applied to any technique in which a program is divided into parts that are 
limited to the specific privileges they require in order to perform a specific task. This 
is used to mitigate the potential damage of a computer security attack. One example 
of this latter interpretation of the principle is removing high privilege operations 
to another process and running that process with the higher privileges required to 
perform its tasks. Day-to-day interfaces are executed in a lower privileged process. 
Least privilege means that every process and every user of the system should 
operate using the least set of privileges necessary to perform the task. A good example 
of the use of this principle is role-based access control, described in Chapter 4. 
The system security policy can identify and define the various roles of users or processes. 
Each role is assigned only those permissions needed to perform its functions. 
Each permission specifies a permitted access to a particular resource (such as read 
and write access to a specified file or directory, connect access to a given host and 
port, etc.). Unless a permission is granted explicitly, the user or process should not 
be able to access the protected resource. More generally, any access control system 
should allow each user only the privileges that are authorized for that user. There 
is also a temporal aspect to the least privilege principle. For example, system programs 
or administrators who have special privileges should have those privileges 
only when necessary; when they are doing ordinary activities, the privileges should 
be withdrawn. Leaving them in place just opens the door to accidents. 
Least common mechanism means that the design should minimize the functions 
shared by different users, providing mutual security. This principle helps 
reduce the number of unintended communication paths and reduces the amount of 
hardware and software on which all users depend, thus making it easier to verify if 
there are any undesirable security implications. 
Psychological acceptability implies that the security mechanisms should not 
interfere unduly with the work of users, while at the same time meeting the needs of 
those who authorize access. If security mechanisms hinder the usability or accessibility 
of resources, then users may opt to turn off those mechanisms. Where possible, 
security mechanisms should be transparent to the users of the system or at most 
introduce minimal obstruction. In addition to not being intrusive or burdensome, 
security procedures must reflect the user’s mental model of protection. If the protection 
procedures do not make sense to the user or if the user must translate his image 
of protection into a substantially different protocol, the user is likely to make errors. 

1.6 / Fundamental Security Desi gn Principles 35 
Isolation is a principle that applies in three contexts. First, public access 
systems should be isolated from critical resources (data, processes, etc.) to prevent 
disclosure or tampering. In cases where the sensitivity or criticality of the 
information is high, organizations may want to limit the number of systems on 
which that data is stored and isolate them, either physically or logically. Physical 
isolation may include ensuring that no physical connection exists between an 
organization’s public access information resources and an organization’s critical 
information. When implementing logical isolation solutions, layers of security 
services and mechanisms should be established between public systems and 
secure systems responsible for protecting critical resources. Second, the processes 
and files of individual users should be isolated from one another except where 
it is explicitly desired. All modern operating systems provide facilities for such 
isolation, so that individual users have separate, isolated process space, memory 
space, and file space, with protections for preventing unauthorized access. 
Finally, security mechanisms should be isolated in the sense of preventing access 
to those mechanisms. For example, logical access control may provide a means 
of isolating cryptographic software from other parts of the host system, and for 
protecting cryptographic software from tampering and the keys from replacement 
or disclosure. 
Encapsulation can be viewed as a specific form of isolation based on objectoriented 
functionality. Protection is provided by encapsulating a collection of procedures 
and data objects in a domain of its own so that the internal structure of a 
data object is accessible only to the procedures of the protected subsystem, and the 
procedures may be called only at designated domain entry points. 
Modularity in the context of security refers both to the development of security 
functions as separate, protected modules and to the use of a modular architecture 
for mechanism design and implementation. With respect to the use of separate 
security modules, the design goal here is to provide common security functions and 
services, such as cryptographic functions, as common modules. For example, numerous 
protocols and applications make use of cryptographic functions. Rather than 
implementing such functions in each protocol or application, a more secure design 
is provided by developing a common cryptographic module that can be invoked by 
numerous protocols and applications. The design and implementation effort can 
then focus on the secure design and implementation of a single cryptographic module 
and including mechanisms to protect the module from tampering. With respect 
to the use of a modular architecture, each security mechanism should be able to 
support migration to new technology or upgrade of new features without requiring 
an entire system redesign. The security design should be modular so that individual 
parts of the security design can be upgraded without the requirement to modify the 
entire system. 
Layering refers to the use of multiple, overlapping protection approaches 
addressing the people, technology, and operational aspects of information systems. 
By using multiple, overlapping protection approaches, the failure or circumvention 
of any individual protection approach will not leave the system unprotected. 
We will see throughout this text that a layering approach is often used to provide 
multiple barriers between an adversary and protected information or services. This 
technique is often referred to as defense in depth. 

36 chapter 1 / Introduction 
Least astonishment means that a program or user interface should always 
respond in the way that is least likely to astonish the user. For example, the mechanism 
for authorization should be transparent enough to a user that the user has a 
good intuitive understanding of how the security goals map to the provided security 
mechanism. 
1.7 A ttack Surfaces and Attack Trees 
In Section 1.3, we provided an overview of the spectrum of security threats and 
attacks facing computer and network systems. Section 11.1 goes into more detail 
about the nature of attacks and the types of adversaries that present security threats. 
This section elaborates on two concepts that are useful in evaluating and classifying 
threats: attack surfaces and attack trees. 
Attack Surfaces 
An attack surface consists of the reachable and exploitable vulnerabilities in a 
system 
[MANA11, HOWA03]. Examples of attack surfaces are the following: 
■ ■ Open ports on outward facing Web and other servers, and code listening on 
those ports 
■ ■ Services available on the inside of a firewall 
■ ■ Code that processes incoming data, e-mail, XML, office documents, and 
industry-
specific custom data exchange formats 
■ ■ Interfaces, SQL, and Web forms 
■ ■ An employee with access to sensitive information vulnerable to a social engineering 
attack 
Attack surfaces can be categorized in the following way: 
■ ■ Network attack surface: This category refers to vulnerabilities over an enterprise 
network, wide-area network, or the Internet. Included in this category 
are network protocol vulnerabilities, such as those used for a denial-of-service 
attack, disruption of communications links, and various forms of intruder 
attacks. 
■ ■ Software attack surface: This refers to vulnerabilities in application, utility, 
or operating system code. A particular focus in this category is Web server 
software. 
■ ■ Human attack surface: This category refers to vulnerabilities created by 
personnel or outsiders, such as social engineering, human error, and trusted 
insiders. 
An attack surface analysis is useful for assessing the scale and severity of 
threats to a system. A systematic analysis of points of vulnerability makes developers 
and security analysts aware of where security mechanisms are required. Once 
an attack surface is defined, designers may be able to find ways to make the surface 

1.7 / Attack Surfaces and Attack Trees 37 
smaller, thus making the task of the adversary more difficult. The attack surface 
also provides guidance on setting priorities for testing, strengthening security measures, 
or modifying the service or application. 
As illustrated in Figure 1.3, the use of layering, or defense in depth, and attack 
surface reduction complement each other in mitigating security risk. 
Attack Trees 
An attack tree is a branching, hierarchical data structure that represents a set of 
potential techniques for exploiting security vulnerabilities [MAUW05, MOOR01, 
SCHN99]. The security incident that is the goal of the attack is represented as the 
root node of the tree, and the ways that an attacker could reach that goal are iteratively 
and incrementally represented as branches and subnodes of the tree. Each 
subnode defines a subgoal, and each subgoal may have its own set of further subgoals, 
etc. The final nodes on the paths outward from the root, that is, the leaf nodes, 
represent different ways to initiate an attack. Each node other than a leaf is either 
an AND-node or an OR-node. To achieve the goal represented by an AND-node, 
the subgoals represented by all of that node’s subnodes must be achieved; and for 
an OR-node, at least one of the subgoals must be achieved. Branches can be labeled 
with values representing difficulty, cost, or other attack attributes, so that alternative 
attacks can be compared. 
The motivation for the use of attack trees is to effectively exploit the information 
available on attack patterns. Organizations such as CERT publish security 
advisories that have enabled the development of a body of knowledge about both 
general attack strategies and specific attack patterns. Security analysts can use the 
attack tree to document security attacks in a structured form that reveals key vulnerabilities. 
The attack tree can guide both the design of systems and applications, 
and the choice and strength of countermeasures. 
Figure 1.4, based on a figure in [DIMI07], is an example of an attack tree 
analysis for an Internet banking authentication application. The root of the tree is 
Figure 1.3 Defense in Depth and Attack Surface 
Attack surface 
Medium 
security risk 
High 
security risk 
Low 
security risk 
Deep 
Layering 
Shallow 
Small Large 
Medium 
security risk 

38 chapter 1 / Introduction 
the objective of the attacker, which is to compromise a user’s account. The shaded 
boxes on the tree are the leaf nodes, which represent events the comprise the 
attacks. Note that in this tree in this example, all the nodes other than leaf nodes 
are OR-nodes. The analysis to generate this tree considered the three components 
involved in authentication: 
■ ■ User terminal and user (UT/U): These attacks target the user equipment, 
including 
the tokens that may be involved, such as smartcards or other password 
generators, as well as the actions of the user. 
■ ■ Communications channel (CC): This type of attack focuses on communication 
links. 
■ ■ Internet banking server (IBS): These types of attacks are offline attacks against 
the servers that host the Internet banking application. 
Figure 1.4 An Attack Tree for Internet Banking Authentication 
Bank account compromise 
User credential compromise 
User credential guessing 
UT/U1a User surveillance 
UT/U1b Theft of token and 
handwritten notes 
Malicious software 
installation Vulnerability exploit 
UT/U2a Hidden code 
UT/U2b Worms 
UT/U3a Smartcard analyzers 
UT/U2c E-mails with 
malicious code 
UT/U3b Smartcard reader 
manipulator 
UT/U3c Brute force attacks 
with PIN calculators 
CC2 Sning 
UT/U4a Social engineering 
IBS3 Web site manipulation 
UT/U4b Web page 
obfuscation 
CC1 Pharming 
Redirection of 
communication toward 
fraudulent site 
CC3 Active man-in-the 
middle attacks 
IBS1 Brute force attacks 
User communication 
with attacker 
Injection of commands 
Use of known authenticated 
session by attacker 
Normal user authentication 
with specied session ID 
CC4 Pre-dened session 
IDs (session hijacking) 
IBS2 Security policy 
violation 

1.8 / A Model for Network Security 39 
Five overall attack strategies can be identified, each of which exploits one or 
more of the three components. The five strategies are as follows: 
■ ■ User credential compromise: This strategy can be used against many elements 
of the attack surface. There are procedural attacks, such as monitoring a user’s 
action to observe a PIN or other credential, or theft of the user’s token or 
handwritten notes. An adversary may also compromise token information 
using a variety of token attack tools, such as hacking the smartcard or using a 
brute force approach to guess the PIN. Another possible strategy is to embed 
malicious software to compromise the user’s login and password. An adversary 
may also attempt to obtain credential information via the communication 
channel (sniffing). Finally, an adversary may use various means to engage in 
communication with the target user, as shown in Figure 1.4. 
■ ■ Injection of commands: In this type of attack, the attacker is able to intercept 
communication between the UT and the IBS. Various schemes can be used to 
be able to impersonate the valid user and so gain access to the banking system. 
■ ■ User credential guessing: It is reported in [HILT06] that brute force attacks 
against some banking authentication schemes are feasible by sending random 
usernames and passwords. The attack mechanism is based on distributed 
zombie personal computers, hosting automated programs for username- or password-
based calculation. 
■ ■ Security policy violation: For example, violating the bank’s security policy in 
combination with weak access control and logging mechanisms, an employee 
may cause an internal security incident and expose a customer’s account. 
■ ■ Use of known authenticated session: This type of attack persuades or forces 
the user to connect to the IBS with a preset session ID. Once the user authenticates 
to the server, the attacker may utilize the known session ID to send 
packets to the IBS, spoofing the user’s identity. 
Figure 1.4 provides a thorough view of the different types of attacks on an 
Internet banking authentication application. Using this tree as a starting point, security 
analysts can assess the risk of each attack and, using the design principles outlined 
in the preceding section, design a comprehensive security facility. [DIMI07] 
provides a good account of the results of this design effort. 
1.8 A Mo del fo r Network Security 
A model for much of what we will be discussing is captured, in very general terms, 
in Figure 1.5. A message is to be transferred from one party to another across some 
sort of Internet service. The two parties, who are the principals in this transaction, 
must cooperate for the exchange to take place. A logical information channel is 
established by defining a route through the Internet from source to destination 
and by the cooperative use of communication protocols (e.g., TCP/IP) by the two 
principals. 

40 chapter 1 / Introduction 
Security aspects come into play when it is necessary or desirable to protect the 
information transmission from an opponent who may present a threat to confidentiality, 
authenticity, and so on. All of the techniques for providing security have two 
components: 
1. A security-related transformation on the information to be sent. Examples include 
the encryption of the message, which scrambles the message so that it is 
unreadable by the opponent, and the addition of a code based on the contents 
of the message, which can be used to verify the identity of the sender. 
2. Some secret information shared by the two principals and, it is hoped, unknown 
to the opponent. An example is an encryption key used in conjunction with the 
transformation to scramble the message before transmission and unscramble 
it on reception.7 
A trusted third party may be needed to achieve secure transmission. For 
example, a third party may be responsible for distributing the secret information 
to the two principals while keeping it from any opponent. Or a third party may be 
needed to arbitrate disputes between the two principals concerning the authenticity 
of a message transmission. 
This general model shows that there are four basic tasks in designing a 
particular 
security service: 
1. Design an algorithm for performing the security-related transformation. The 
algorithm should be such that an opponent cannot defeat its purpose. 
2. Generate the secret information to be used with the algorithm. 
7Chapter 3 discusses a form of encryption, known as asymmetric encryption, in which only one of the two 
principals needs to have the secret information. 
Figure 1.5 Model for Network Security 
Information 
Security-related channel 
transformation 
Sender 
Secret 
information 
Message 
Message 
Secure 
message 
Secure 
message 
Recipient 
Opponent 
Trusted third party 
(e.g., arbiter, distributer 
of secret information) 
Security-related 
transformation 
Secret 
information 

1.8 / A Model for Network Security 41 
3. Develop methods for the distribution and sharing of the secret information. 
4. Specify a protocol to be used by the two principals that make use of the security 
algorithm and the secret information to achieve a particular security service. 
Parts One and Two of this book concentrate on the types of security mechanisms 
and services that fit into the model shown in Figure 1.5. However, there 
are other security-related situations of interest that do not neatly fit this model 
but are considered in this book. A general model of these other situations is illustrated 
by Figure 1.6, which reflects a concern for protecting an information system 
from unwanted access. Most readers are familiar with the concerns caused by the 
existence of hackers who attempt to penetrate systems that can be accessed over 
a network. The hacker can be someone who, with no malign intent, simply gets 
satisfaction from breaking and entering a computer system. The intruder can be a 
disgruntled employee who wishes to do damage or a criminal who seeks to exploit 
computer assets for financial gain (e.g., obtaining credit card numbers or performing 
illegal money transfers). 
Another type of unwanted access is the placement in a computer system of 
logic that exploits vulnerabilities in the system and that can affect application programs 
as well as utility programs, such as editors and compilers. Programs can present 
two kinds of threats: 
1. Information access threats: Intercept or modify data on behalf of users who 
should not have access to that data. 
2. Service threats: Exploit service flaws in computers to inhibit use by legitimate 
users. 
Viruses and worms are two examples of software attacks. Such attacks can be 
introduced into a system by means of a disk that contains the unwanted logic concealed 
in otherwise useful software. They also can be inserted into a system across a 
network; this latter mechanism is of more concern in network security. 
The security mechanisms needed to cope with unwanted access fall into two 
broad categories (see Figure 1.6). The first category might be termed a gatekeeper 
function. It includes password-based login procedures that are designed to deny 
access to all but authorized users and screening logic that is designed to detect and 
reject worms, viruses, and other similar attacks. Once either an unwanted user 
Figure 1.6 Network Access Security Model 
Computing resources 
(processor, memory, I/O) 
Data 
Processes 
Software 
Internal security controls 
Information system 
Gatekeeper 
function 
Opponent 
—human (e.g., hacker) 
—software 
(e.g., virus, worm) 
Access channel 

42 chapter 1 / Introduction 
or unwanted software gains access, the second line of defense consists of a variety 
of internal controls that monitor activity and analyze stored information in an 
attempt to detect the presence of unwanted intruders. These issues are explored in 
Part Three. 
1.9 S tandards 
Many of the security techniques and applications described in this book have 
been specified as standards. Additionally, standards have been developed to 
cover management 
practices and the overall architecture of security mechanisms 
and services. 
Throughout this book, we describe the most important standards in 
use or being developed for various aspects of cryptography and network security. 
Various organizations have been involved in the development or promotion of 
these standards. 
The most important (in the current context) of these organizations 
are as follows. 
■ ■ National Institute of Standards and Technology: NIST is a U.S. federal agency 
that deals with measurement science, standards, and technology related to 
U.S. government use and to the promotion of U.S. private-sector innovation. 
Despite its national scope, NIST Federal Information Processing Standards 
(FIPS) and Special Publications (SP) have a worldwide impact. 
■ ■ Internet Society: ISOC is a professional membership society with worldwide 
organizational and individual membership. It provides leadership in addressing 
issues that confront the future of the Internet and is the organization home 
for the groups responsible for Internet infrastructure standards, including the 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) and the Internet Architecture Board 
(IAB). These organizations develop Internet standards and related specifications, 
all of which are published as Requests for Comments (RFCs). 
A more detailed discussion of these organizations is contained in Appendix C. 
1.10 K ey Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 
Key Terms 
access control 
active attack 
authentication 
authenticity 
availability 
data confidentiality 
data integrity 
denial of service 
encryption 
integrity 
intruder 
masquerade 
nonrepudiation 
OSI security architecture 
passive attack 
replay 
security attacks 
security mechanisms 
security services 
traffic analysis 

1.10 / Key Terms, Review Questions, and Problems 43 
Review Questions 
1.1 What is the OSI security architecture? 
1.2 Briefly explain masquerade attack with an example. 
1.3 What is the difference between security threats and attacks? 
1.4 Why are passive attacks difficult to detect and active attacks difficult to prevent? 
1.5 Identify the different security attacks prevented by the security mechanisms defined 
in X.800. 
1.6 List and briefly define the fundamental security design principles. 
1.7 Explain the difference between an attack surface and an attack tree. 
Problems 
1.1 Consider an automated teller machine (ATM) in which users provide a personal 
identification number (PIN) and a card for account access. Give examples of confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability requirements associated with the system. In each 
case, indicate the degree of importance of the requirement. 
1.2 Repeat Problem 1.1 for a telephone switching system that routes calls through a 
switching network based on the telephone number requested by the caller. 
1.3 Consider a desktop publishing system used to produce documents for various 
organizations. 
a. Give an example of a type of publication for which confidentiality of the stored 
data is the most important requirement. 
b. Give an example of a type of publication in which data integrity is the most important 
requirement. 
c. Give an example in which system availability is the most important requirement. 
1.4 For each of the following assets, assign a low, moderate, or high impact level for the 
loss of confidentiality, availability, and integrity, respectively. Justify your answers. 
a. A portal maintained by the Government to provide information regarding its 
departments 
and services. 
b. A hospital managing the medical records of its patients. 
c. A financial organization managing routine administrative information (not privacy-
related information). 
d. An information system used for large acquisitions in a contracting organization 
that contains both sensitive, pre-solicitation phase contract information and routine 
administrative information. Assess the impact for the two data sets separately 
and the information system as a whole. 
e. The Examinations department of a University maintains examination particulars, 
such as question papers of forthcoming examinations, grades obtained, and 
examiner 
details. The University’s administrative department maintains the 
students’ 
attendance particulars and internal assessment results. Assess the impact 
for the two data sets separately and the information system as a whole. 
1.5 Draw a matrix similar to Table 1.4 that shows the relationship between security 
attacks 
and mechanisms. 
1.6 Draw a matrix similar to Table 1.4 that shows the relationship between security 
mechanisms and services. 
1.7 Develop an attack tree for gaining access to customer account details from the 
database 
of a bank. 
1.8 Consider a company whose operations are housed in two buildings on the same property; 
one building is headquarters, the other building contains network and computer 
services. The property is physically protected by a fence around the perimeter. The 
only entrance to the property is through the fenced perimeter. In addition to the 

44 chapter 1 / Introduction 
perimeter fence, physical security consists of a guarded front gate. The local networks 
are split between the Headquarters’ LAN and the Network Services’ LAN. Internet 
users connect to the Web server through a firewall. Dial-up users get access to a 
particular server on the Network Services’ LAN. Develop an attack tree in which 
the root node represents disclosure of proprietary secrets. Include physical, social 
engineering, 
and technical attacks. The tree may contain both AND and OR nodes. 
Develop a tree that has at least 15 leaf nodes. 
1.9 Read all of the classic papers cited in the Recommended Reading section for this 
chapter, 
available at the Author Web site at WilliamStallings.com/NetworkSecurity. 
The papers are available at box.com/NetSec6e. Compose a 500–1000 word paper (or 
8 to 12 slide PowerPoint presentation) that summarizes the key concepts that emerge 
from these papers, emphasizing concepts that are common to most or all of the papers. 

